Climate Change and Risk 
Management in Indian Agriculture
Pratap Singh Birthal
NABARD Research and Policy Series No. 4/2022  
O³es³e
NABARD Research and Policy Series No. 4/2022
Yeejleer³e ke=Àef<e cesW peueJee³eg HeefjJele&ve Deewj peesefæKece ÒeyebOeve
Climate Change and Risk Management in Indian Agriculture
प्रताप सिंह बिरथल
Pratap Singh Birthal 
आर्थिक विश्लेषण और अनुसंधान विभाग
Department of Economic Analysis and Research
राष्ट्रीीय कृषि और ग्राामीण विकास बैंक, मुंबई
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development, Mumbai
2
Climate Change and Risk Management in Indian Agriculture
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
Office Address
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
Plot No. C-24. ‘G’ Block, Bandra-Kurla Complex
Bandra (E), Mumbai - 400051
Email : dear@nabard.org
Website : www.nabard.org  
© National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development 2022 
ISBN 978-93-5635-931-4 
Published by
Department of Economic Analysis and Research
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
Plot No. C-24. ‘G’ Block, Bandra-Kurla Complex
Bandra (E), Mumbai - 400051
Printed at
Image Impression
Mumbai
पलेपर में उद्ृत तथों और व्यक्त षवचारों कले षलए राष्ट् ीय बैंक ष़िम्लेदार नहीं है।
The National Bank is not responsible for the facts cited and views expressed in the paper.
i
Chairman’s Message
Academic research can inform policy making. ­However, 
since each piece of research may cover certain ­aspects of an 
issue, a comprehensive review of research may help ­collate 
the findings that may lead to policy ­recommendations. 
­Further, the research available may be often very ­technical 
and less communicative to the policy makers. NABARD 
commenced the “Research and Policy” series to commission 
review ­papers on ­various themes to bring research findings 
on a given theme in a capsule form.
With this series, veteran scholars in different fields of specialisation have been 
requested to document research in their field highlighting various issues, policy 
­relevance and prescriptions, and suggestions for future research. I am glad to present 
the paper on “Climate Change and Risk Management in ­Indian Agriculture” by Dr. 
Pratap Singh Birthal who has been an authority on the ­subject.
The series will present more such authoritative papers on various issues ­ranging 
from climate change to agricultural policy in the coming months. I hope that series 
will be beneficial to academicians, researchers and policy ­makers for use at the ground 
level. 
My best wishes to the authors and the Department of Economic Analysis and 
­Research (DEAR) for initiating such wonderful series.
Dr. G. R. Chintala
ii
iii
Foreword
There is a vast body of research available on topics ­related 
to agriculture and rural development in the academic 
world. But, most of it is in the technical realm and not in 
a form which could feed into the policy. Research must 
first lead to better understanding of a subject and then 
into a robust policy, wherever it can, so that it touches 
the multitude of Indians across the length and breadth 
of our ­country through better public policy and efficient 
services. ­Discussion with my colleagues on this issue 
lead to this new series “Research & Policy”. We wish that 
this series will provide the breadth and depth of research into an area topped up by a 
lucid presentation for the policy makers. 
I am happy to present the fourth publication in this series on “Climate Change and 
Risk Management in Indian Agriculture” written by Dr. Pratap Singh Birthal.
I wish this new series acts as a bridge between the researchers & policy makers.
 
P. V. S. Suryakumar
Deputy Managing Director
 
iv
v
Preface
Agriculture sector proved a silver lining in the  pandemic  
period registering a positive growth in the covid times. Yet it 
faces various structural challenges to be  addressed to make 
it profitable. For, most of the  population is still  dependent 
on the sector. As we all know,  investing in research is one of 
the best strategies to address  problems of  agriculture. 
Equally important is to  communicate the  research findings 
to policy makers to design and tweak  policies that matter. 
During one of our meetings with Shri P. V. S. Suryakumar, 
our DMD, we had loud  thinking if we can commission a 
few review  papers on a select themes. We thought that it is appropriate to request 
veteran scholars who spent prime of their life on a given research theme to attempt 
such a work where they will distil their understanding and the research done on the 
theme in a short  paper. Duly encouraged by DMD and Chairman, we wrote to a dozen 
eminent scholars. And the response was overwhelming  resulting in  Department of 
 Economic  Analysis and Research (DEAR), the research wing of  NABARD, initiating 
the ‘ Research and  Policy’ series. The motivation is, thus, to get a few handles from 
research that can help  effective policy intervention. This series will be useful to policy 
makers and  researchers alike. 
The ‘Research and Policy’ series is an attempt to get a glimpse of  hardcore research 
findings in a capsule form thereby making it more effective and  communicative to 
policy makers. The group of researchers who agreed to  prepare a review of research 
have spent their life in the field of agricultural research. Our purpose here, as we 
communicated to them, was not just to get literature survey but to get researcher’s 
heart and their experience which they gained during their long passionate innings. 
The paper is expected to highlight various issues, policy relevance, prescription, and 
suggestion for future papers on the themes of interest to NABARD.
With agriculture being a primary source of livelihood for most of I ndians and 
significant proportion of it being under rainfed conditions, the  current paper on 
‘Climate Change and Risk Management in Indian  Agriculture’ written by Dr. Pratap 
Singh Birthal, Professor, National Institute of  Agricultural Economics and  Policy 
vi
Research, New Delhi, assumes importance. Dr. Birthal has an illustrious  academic 
career, and his research interests include agricultural economics,  livestock develop-
ment policy, agri-food value chains and climate change impacts and  adaptations.
The present paper aims to analyse different approaches used for estimation and 
predictions 
of 
climate 
change 
impact 
on various crops 
for different 
time  
periods,  geographies, crop seasons and climatic conditions majorly in terms of yield 
loss.  Further, it analyses how different management strategies such as crop  
diversification, irrigation, 
stress-tolerant 
seeds, 
agronomic  management, 
crop 
insurance, social  safety nets, etc reduces the risk and sensitivity to  climate 
change. The author also  identifies a number of research gaps that must be  
addressed in light of the predicted rise in the frequency of extreme climate events in 
plausible future climatic  scenarios. At the end the author highlights way forward for 
designing and implementing  effective  policies in making  agriculture resilient to climate 
change. Overall, the paper is a food for thought to the readers. 
In bringing this series as planned, we would like to express our sincere  gratitude to 
Dr. G. R. Chintala, Chairman, NABARD for his inspiring  leadership, unstinted  
support and guidance. We also wish to express our sincere thanks to Shri P. V. S. 
Suryakumar, DMD, for being the inspiration and the driving force behind the  
publication of this first of its kind series. We are grateful to the  authors of this series 
who agreed to write on themes relevant to NABARD in such a short period of time. 
Indeed, it has been a great privilege for us. 
I also acknowledge the contributions of the officers of DEAR, NABARD 
especially Dr. Ashutosh Kumar, DGM; Mrs. Geeta Acharya, Manager; Ms Neha  
Gupta, Shri Vinay Jadhav, Assistant Managers, and others who coordinated with the 
authors and the editor to bring out the series as envisaged.
Thanks are due to Dr. J. Dennis Rajakumar, Director, EPWRF and his team for 
their contribution in copy editing and bringing uniformity to the document.
Hope this booklet and the series would interest all stakeholders.
K. J. Satyasai
Chief General Manager
Department of Economic Analysis and Research (DEAR)
NABARD, Mumbai-400051
vii
Acknowledgement
This research report would have not been possible without the financial support 
from National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD). My sincere 
thanks to Dr. K. J. Satyasai, Chief General Manager, Department of Economic 
Analysis and Research (DEAR), NABARD, for giving me this opportunity and for 
providing suggestions at various stages of the work. I also thank the other officers of 
DEAR for their support.
Pratap Singh Birthal 
ICAR National Professor
ICAR-National Institute of Agricultural Economics and Policy Research
DPS Road, New Delhi-110 012
viii
ix
Contents
	
Chairman’s Message	
i
	
Foreword	
iii
	
Preface		
v
	
Acknowledgement	
vii
	
List of Tables	
xi	
	
List of Figure	
xiii
	
Abbreviations	
xv
	
Executive Summary	
xvii
	
1	
Introduction	
1
2	
Impact of Climate Change on Agriculture	
4
3 	 Risk Management Strategies	
14
4 	 Policies and Institutions	
21	
	
5	
Conclusions and Implications	
25	
	
References	
28	
x
xi
List of Tables
    No.	 	    Title	
Page
 1	
Projected Impact of Climate Change on Crop Yields	
7
 	
and their Area Shares (%)
	
2 	
Returns and Loss in Different Crops by Source of Risk (Rs/ha) 	
9
	
3 	
Rice Yield Loss due to Droughts in India	
10
	
4 	
Frequency Distribution of Risk Management Measures	
19
	
Practiced by Farm Households
	
5 	
Average Treatment Effects of Risk Management Strategies 	
20
	
(% Change had the Adopters not Adopted)
xii
xiii
List of Figure
     No.	 	    Title	
Page
     
 	
1 	
Trend in Average Temperature in India, 2003 to 2096  	
2	
xiv
xv
Abbreviations
CROPGRO	
Crop Growth 
DEAR	
Department of Economic Analysis and Research 
DSSAT	
Decision Support System for Agrotechnology Transfer 
EM-DAT	
Emergency Events Database
GVA	
Gross Value Added
ICAR 	
Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
ICT 	
Information and Communication Technology
IPCC	
Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change
KVKs	
Krishi Vigyan Kendras
MGNREGA	
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
NABARD	
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development 
NAPCC	
National Action Plan on Climate Change 
NARS	
National ­Agricultural Research System 
NGOs 	
Non-Governmental Organizations 
NICRA	
National Innovations on Climate Resilient Agriculture 
PDS 	
Public Distribution System
RCP	
Representative Concentration Pathway
SMS 	
Short Message Service 
xvi
xvii
Executive Summary
Climate change has emerged as a big threat to the sustainable ­development of 
­agriculture, food and nutrition security, and livelihoods of millions of smallholder 
farmers. Predictions suggest a significant rise in the surface ­temperature and the 
­frequency of climate extremes such as droughts, floods, heat waves and cold waves 
in the plausible future climate scenarios. An ­increase of 1.5°C in the temperature is 
­predicted to severely affect crop yields and food ­supplies, ­human and animal health, 
and ecosystem services. Towards the end of this century, ­India’s surface ­temperature 
under the moderate greenhouse ­representative ­concentration pathway (RCP) 4.5 is 
expected to increase by 1.57°C over its level in 2019. This paper undertakes a ­critical 
review of the literature on ­climate change impact on Indian agriculture and their 
­management in order to ­identify gaps in the existing literature and to draw lessons 
for ­reorientation of ­agricultural research, institutional and policy landscapes for 
­enhancing ­efficiency, sustainability and resilience of agriculture.
Impact of Climate Change
Several studies have investigated the impact of climate change on Indian ­agriculture 
using different datasets and estimation procedures. Under the ­controlled experiments, 
the impact of climate change on crop yields are often negative for most crops, but 
upwardly biased because of the non-accounting of technological ­advancements and 
autonomous adaptations. To overcome this limitation, the economists have relied on 
the production function approach, wherein the crop yield or agricultural productivity 
is regressed on climate variables, controlling for several other covariates, to recover 
the impact of climate change. Notwithstanding the proliferation in the literature on 
climate change impact, there remain some gaps in the empirical literature.
(i) 	
The research on climate change impact has focussed primarily on the 
staple food crops, ignoring the horticultural crops, dairying and ­animal 
­husbandry, and fisheries, which together comprise about 60% of the 
­agricultural gross value added (GVA), and these are ­expected to drive 
­future growth in agriculture. These activities are more ­exposed to climate 
risks, from farm to fork, hence, need greater focus of ­research on climate 
change impact and their management. 
xviii
(ii)	
Indian agriculture, in spite of the significant expansion of irrigation 
­facilities, remains a gamble on the monsoons. Predictions indicate a ­little 
or no change in the quantum of rainfall, but a significant change in its 
­temporal distribution in terms of fewer but concentrated rainy days. This 
suggests the need to probe into the relationship between timings of rainfall 
and crop yields. Likewise, our understanding of the impact of the ­timings 
of heat stress during crop development is also limited. The research should 
focus on ‘how variations in ­temperature and precipitation at different 
­stages of crop development influence its performance’. 
(iii)	
The quality of natural endowments, especially soils and groundwater, plays 
an important role in moderating the impact of climate change on crop 
choices and crop yields. Yet, there is limited ­empirical ­evidence on how the 
quality of natural endowments influences ­climate change impact? For the 
context-specific climate adaptation strategies, it is essential to know the 
role of natural endowments in shaping climate change impact. 
(iv)	
Studies have predicted the impact of climate change on ­agricultural 
­productivity and food supplies on the assumption that the current 
­acreage allocations or cropping patterns would persist in the long run 
also. ­Nonetheless, the possibility of a change in the crops’ comparative 
­advantage due to climate change cannot be ignored. Hence, it is imperative 
to know through empirical studies the likely impact of climate change on 
the intra-regional and inter-regional shifts in land use. 
(v)	
Farmers face multiple climate risks, namely, droughts, floods, heat waves 
and cold waves, hailstorms and cyclones; yet, there is hardly any study 
that has concurrently investigated the impact of ­multiple climate risks 
on crop yields or agricultural productivity. More ­analysis is required on 
their ­relative impact for the evidence-based feedback for prioritisation of 
­strategies to manage their adverse effects.  
(vi)	
Literature on climate change impact has focused mainly on the upstream 
of agricultural supply chains. Nonetheless, there is a very high probability 
that climate impact would transmit from upstream to downstream of the 
supply chain affecting the actors and activities all along the supply chain. 
xix
Research is required on the mechanisms of risk transmission along the 
supply chain, and its impact on the ­efficiency and sustainability of different 
segments of the chain. 
Risk Management Strategies 
Farmers do not passively tolerate the climate risks. Based on their exposure to 
climate anomalies in the past, attitudes towards risk and access to information and 
finances, they use several traditional as well modern risk ­management ­measures. 
The traditional measures include the use of stress-­tolerant crops, changes in 
­planting dates and input applications, including that of ­irrigation and ­fertilizers, and 
soil and ­water conservation techniques. The modern ­measures are crop ­insurance 
and ­hedging. Based on their risk functions, these measures can be classified as 
­risk-mitigating, ­risk-transferring and risk-­coping. The ­evidences show that ­farmers 
benefit from the adoption of all types of risk ­management strategies, but more from 
their joint ­adoption. Crop ­diversification is observed to enhance farm ­productivity 
and lower risk ­exposure. Irrigation plays a dual role in raising crop yield and 
­reducing its ­sensitivity to heat stress and droughts. Crop insurance also ­improves 
farm ­productivity and reduces downside risk exposure, but not as much as what 
­irrigation does. The risk ­benefits of irrigation, however, have been observed to have 
slowed down. 
Nevertheless, the literature on the adoption of risk management measures/­
strategies and their impact is not adequate to draw creditable inferences for ­advocating 
their mainstreaming into the agricultural development policies. More research is 
­required on the following issues:
(i)	
Preparation of an inventory of farmers’ adaptation measures, ­including the 
traditional and modern, formal and informal, direct and indirect, against 
different climatic shocks; and elicit farmers’ opinions on their potential net 
adaptation benefits or trade-off between their income and risk functions, 
and accordingly prioritize these to provide feedback to policymakers for 
­refining and implementing them at the farm level. 
(ii)	
The concept of ‘climate-smart agriculture’ derives its strength from ­scientific 
innovations and improved agronomic practices, but it ­ignores ­several 
xx
­traditional practices that hold the promise of raising farm income and 
­reducing risk. In smallholder agrarian ­economies, the ­integration of ­scientific 
innovations and traditional practices ­possibly comprise an ­important means 
of increasing productivity, ­sustainability and resilience of agriculture. It is, 
therefore, important to develop ­optimal crop- and location-specific packages 
of climate-smart practices blending the scientific ­innovations and farmers’ 
self-risk adjustment practices. 
(iii)	 Farmers’ 
face 
several 
technological, 
informational, 
psychological, 
­sociocultural, financial and institutional barriers to the adoption of risk 
­management strategies. There is a need for more studies on the ­identification 
and prioritisation of constraints to the adoption of ­climate-smart ­technologies 
and practices. 
Policies and Institutions 
The state has an important role in imparting resilience to ­agriculture through, 
one, designing context-specific policies and programmes, and ­ensuring their 
­implementation through better coordination across different ­administrative levels 
for the smooth flow of information, knowledge and ­resources to farmers; and, two, 
convergence of different programmes being implemented by different ministries and 
departments for efficient use of financial and human ­resources. Yet, there is a lack of 
coordination across different administrative levels in ­targeting climate mitigation and 
adaptation programmes, and convergence among different programmes. There is a 
need for evidence-based recommendations for mainstreaming the climate mitigation 
and adaptation strategies into the ­agricultural and economic development agenda in 
certain areas to:  
(i)	
Analyze strengths and weaknesses of the existing climate adaptation ­projects 
at their different levels of implementation, and draw lessons for alleviating 
administrative, financial, informational and human ­resource barriers to 
­improve their implementation efficiency.
(ii)	
Map linkages between different programmes or projects ­implemented 
by ­different ministries and departments, and assess the potential ­social, 
­economic and environmental benefits from their convergence. 
xxi
(iii)	 Explore opportunities and constraints in financing mitigation and 
­adaptation strategies all along the agricultural supply chain from ­genetics 
to ­end-consumption, and identify the prospects for the ­enhanced interface 
of the financial institutions with other ­stakeholders including the public and 
private sector organisations. 
(iv)	 Estimate returns on investment in research on climate-resilient ­activities 
such as crop breeding for stress tolerance and ­management of natural 
­resources, and also returns on investment in agromet ­advisory services.  
xxii
 	
Climate Change and Risk Management 
in Indian Agriculture
1.  Introduction
Over the past five decades, the innovations in crop, animal breeding and ­natural 
resource management, supported by the massive public investment in ­irrigation, 
­infrastructure and institutions, and the economic incentives (i.e., ­input subsidies and 
output support prices) have spurred considerable growth in agricultural ­productivity 
and food supplies in India, turning it ­self-sufficient in several food commodities 
­despite the rapid growth in population. Yet, ­agriculture remains at a crossroads. The 
­technological gains realised in the ­initial phases of the agricultural revolutions (i.e., 
green, white and blue) have started ­decelerating (Birthal 2019), but the need to produce 
more and diverse foods from limited ­resources (i.e., land and water) remains as urgent 
as in the past. By 2050, India’s population is expected to cross 1.6 billion mark, and it 
will be accompanied by significant demographic and economic transitions. More than 
half of the population will live in cities and towns, and it will be more affluent than 
ever. These factors will fuel a significant increase in the demand for food — more for 
the horticultural and animal source foods (Hamshere et al. 2014).
On the other hand, the efforts towards increasing the food supplies would ­confront 
several biotic and abiotic stresses, including the quantitative and ­qualitative ­deterioration 
of natural resources (i.e., land and water), ­increasing pest pressures and ­shrinking farm 
size. Since the early 1970s, India’s net cropped area has been ­stagnating around 140 
million hectares, indicating little ­prospects of accelerating ­agricultural growth through 
area expansion (Birthal et al. 2014a). Moreover, about 104 million hectares of arable 
land suffers from one or the other kind of ­degradation. The annual water availability has 
fallen to 1441 m3 per capita in 2015, which is ­lower than the ­water-stressed norm of 1,700 
m3 (Government of India 2019). ­Currently, ­agriculture uses about 84% of the available 
water. But its household and ­industrial ­demand is expected to increase faster due to the 
increasing urbanisation and ­expanding ­industrialisation. 
More importantly, climate change and its manifestation, as extreme events such 
as droughts, floods, heat and cold waves, hailstorms and cyclones, have emerged as a 
big threat to the sustainable development of agriculture and ­livelihoods of ­millions of 
2
Pratap Singh Birthal
poor farmers and consumers. From 1950 to 2010, ­India’s average surface ­temperature 
increased by 0.11°C per decade (Mani et al. 2018), and it is predicted to increase ­further 
in the plausible future climate scenarios. Even under the RCP4.51 — the ­moderate 
greenhouse concentration pathway — by 2099, the average surface ­temperature is 
­expected to be 1.57°C higher over its current level (i.e., in 2019), and under the RCP8.5, 
it will by 4.36°C higher (Figure 1). 
The rising temperature will be accompanied by an increase in the ­frequency of 
extreme climatic events such as heat waves and droughts (World Bank 2013; Sanjay 
et al. 2020). Although the amount of rainfall is unlikely to change much, there will 
be a considerable variation in its inter-regional and within-season distribution, lead­
ing to droughts and floods (World Bank 2013; Mani et al. 2018; Sanjay et al. 2020). 
The frequency of all types of climate extremes has increased in India in the recent 
past, and often in tandem (Birthal et al. 2021a). For ­example, the lower Indo-Ganget­
ic plains often experience the ­simultaneous occurrence of droughts, heat waves and 
floods. The greater the frequency of an extreme climatic event, the greater is its nega­
tive impact on agriculture and agriculture-based livelihoods. Hence, understanding 
their consequences on agricultural and overall economic growth, food and nutrition 
security, poverty, animal and human health, and ecosystem is essential to designing 
effective contemporary policies and institutions for their mitigation and adaptation. 
 
 
 
Source: https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/india/climate-data-projections 
 
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
2003
2006
2009
2012
2015
2018
2021
2024
2027
2030
2033
2036
2039
2042
2045
2048
2051
2054
2057
2060
2063
2066
2069
2072
2075
2078
2081
2084
2087
2090
2093
2096
degree C 
Figure 1: Trend in Average Temperature in India, 2003 to 2096 
RCP2.6
RCP4.5
RCP6.0
RCP8.5
3
Climate Change and Risk Management in Indian Agriculture
Climate change impact are disproportionately distributed across populations and 
countries. Developing countries, which heavily depend on agriculture and lack tech­
nologies and finances for risk management, suffer more from ­climate risks. Dell et al. 
(2012) had shown that excess temperature had a larger ­negative impact on agricul­
tural growth in the developing countries than in the ­developed countries. In a recent 
study, Ortiz-Bobea et al. (2021) had shown that since 1960, climate change had slowed 
down the productivity growth of world ­agriculture by 21%, with a bigger impact in the 
developing countries. Birthal et al. (2021a) also reported similar evidence for India; 
they found ­climatic ­hazards reducing the productivity growth by one-fourth and a 
bigger reduction in it in the low-income and more agrarian states. 
The socio-economic consequences of the negative impact of climate change on ag­
riculture are also more pronounced for developing countries. ­Hallegatte et al. (2016) 
reported that climatic shocks had caused a ­disproportionately large increase in the un­
dernutrition and poverty rates in South Asia and ­Sub-Saharan Africa than elsewhere 
in the world. Many other studies (Bhandari et al. 2007; Hill and ­Mejia-Mantilla 2015; 
Amare et al. 2018) also reported a substantial reduction in the household ­income and 
consumption expenditure due to the ­negative rainfall shocks. For ­instance, in India, 
in a drought year, the household income was less by 25%-60%, and the head-count 
poverty was higher by 12%-33% (Bhandari et al. 2007). The long term ­consequences of 
frequent ­exposure to multiple risks could be devastating — they may result in ­depletion 
of the household savings, sale of assets and increase in their indebtedness; act as a 
disincentive to the adoption of new technologies and innovations; and, cause degra­
dation of the natural resources and ecosystem services (Rosenzweig and Binswanger 
1993; Dercon 2004; Dercon and Christiaensen 2011; Bhandari et al. 2007). There is 
an apprehension that the poor farmers, in the absence of mitigation and adaptation 
measures, may not fully recover from the impact of climatic shocks and remain in 
low-income trap and perpetual debt and poverty (Dercon and ­Christiaensen 2011; 
Vargas and Angelino, 2012). 
Nonetheless, it has also been demonstrated concurrently that the adverse ­impact 
of climate change on agriculture and agriculture-based livelihoods can be offset by 
following comprehensive integrated approaches, encompassing the technological 
­advances in agriculture, meteorology, information and communication and data 
­sciences, and the traditional cropping practices that farmers ­follow as a part of their 
4
Pratap Singh Birthal
farm management. Depending on the degree of risk-aversion, resource endowments 
and access to information and finances, the farm households use one or the other 
measure to manage the climate risks. From a comprehensive review of the adaptation 
literature, Altieri and Nicholls (2013) noted that in smallholder-dominated ­agrarian 
economies, the ­integration of scientific innovations with traditional practices was 
one of the robust paths to increasing productivity, sustainability and resilience of 
­agriculture. 
This paper presents a synoptic view of the empirical literature on the impact of 
climate change on Indian agriculture and their management. ­Specifically, it identi­
fies gaps in the existing empirical literature and suggests future ­research and policy 
priorities, and their mainstreaming into the ­agricultural and ­economic development 
agenda. Globally, the empirical literature on ­climate change impact on agriculture 
and agriculture-based livelihoods, and their management has proliferated in the 
­recent past. However, in this paper, we restrict our observations drawn from studies 
that have focussed on Indian ­agriculture. 
The next section provides a comprehensive assessment of the impact of ­climate 
change on agriculture and agriculture-based livelihoods. Section 3 ­deliberates on 
the risk management strategies and their impact on farm ­income and downside 
risk ­exposure. Section 4 discusses the technological, ­institutional and policy issues 
­towards making agriculture climate-resilient agriculture. Concluding remarks are 
made in the last section.  
2. Impact of Climate Change on Agriculture
Climate change influences agriculture and agriculture-based livelihoods both 
directly and indirectly. Its direct effects include changes in the yields of crops and 
animals. It indirectly influences the yields through the supply and ­demand for irriga­
tion, inputs and energy, and the behavioural changes in ­insect pests and diseases. The 
impact of climate risks could transmit along the supply or value chains from genetics 
to end-consumption, affecting the ­efficiency and sustainability of the entire chain and 
the livelihoods of chain actors. 
Climate change may alter rainfall behaviour, in terms of its quantum and distri­
bution. Excess rainfall often leads to floods and deficit rainfall to droughts. Lesser 
5
Climate Change and Risk Management in Indian Agriculture
rainfall means less recharge of aquifers, limiting the supply of water for irrigation. 
A rise in temperature leads to an increase in ­evapotranspiration rate, and therefore 
more demand for irrigation water. Climate change is also ­expected to alter the pest 
behaviour — changes in the infestation level, the ­resistance and resurgence, and the 
emergence of new pests under the changed climatic conditions.  
Several studies have investigated the impact of climate change on Indian agricul­
ture employing different datasets and estimation procedures. Biological scientists of­
ten rely on the controlled experiments to quantify the impact of changes in a weather 
parameter, mainly temperature, on crop yields. ­Ceteris paribus, under the controlled 
conditions, a crop is subjected to varying ­degrees of temperature, and then its yield is 
compared across temperature levels to ­recover the magnitude of yield loss (Sinha and 
Swaminathan 1991; Lal et al. 1998; Saseendran et al. 2000; Aggarwal and Mall 2002; 
Mall et al. 2006; Kalra et al. 2007; Aggarwal 2009; Srivastava et al. 2010; Kumar et al. 
2013, 2014a, 2014b, 2015, 2019, 2020). The estimates of yield loss are used to predict 
crop yields in plausible future climate scenarios using biophysical crop models such 
as ­Decision Support System for Agrotechnology Transfer (DSSAT) and crop growth 
(CROPGRO). From a series of experiments, Kumar et al. (2013, 2014a, 2014b, 2015, 
2019, 2020) had demonstrated that climate change negatively ­impacted yields of most 
field crops. By 2040, under the RCP4.5, the yield of wheat was expected to be 9% less, 
irrigated rice 12%, maize 18%, ­mustard 12% and potato 13%. Srivastava et al. (2010) 
estimated a loss of 2.5% for rainfed sorghum. Aggarwal (2009) reported that a 1.0°C 
rise in the mean temperature could reduce wheat, soybean, mustard, groundnut and 
potato yields in the range of 3% to 7%. By 2099, if the mean temperature were to rise 
by 2.5°C-4.9°C, the damages would be in the range of 10%-40%. However, crops like 
groundnut, soybean and cotton are predicted to benefit from the rise in ­temperature. 
Scientific studies have also come out with evidence of mixed impact of ­climate 
change on crop yields depending on the geographical locations. By 2050, pearl ­millet 
yield is predicted to decline by 4%-14% in Maharashtra and to increase by 8% in 
Haryana (Singh et al. 2017). Likewise, Singh et al. (2014) had predicted an increase of 
­17%-25% in chickpea yield in Haryana and ­Madhya Pradesh, but a ­decline of ­7%-16% 
in Andhra Pradesh. The opposing impact of climate change on the ­performance 
of a crop under different geographical or agro-climatic conditions could be due to 
the ­measurement errors, differences in genetic potential of crop varieties (yield 
6
Pratap Singh Birthal
­improvement versus stress ­tolerance) and agronomic practices including planting 
dates, input use and plant care. 
The experimental approach to the estimation of climate change impact is ­criticised 
for not accounting for the real farmers’ behaviour in real settings (Dell et al. 2014). For 
example, modelling climate change impact using ­experimental data does not ­account 
for the technological advances and autonomous ­adaptations happening over time, and 
therefore these are often ­overestimated. To overcome this limitation, Mendelsohn et 
al. (1994) proposed a new approach that estimates cross-section ­regressions with land 
values as a function of the climate variables. The approach was termed the ­‘Ricardian 
­approach’. They arrived at much smaller estimates of climate impact as ­compared to 
those ­obtained from controlled experimentation. ­Nonetheless, one of the criticisms 
of the Ricardian approach is that it does not account for the ­influences of ­availability 
of irrigation and remoteness on land values. Deschênes and Greenstone (2007) also 
­criticised this approach on the ground that cross-section ­hedonic ­regressions ­produced 
biased results because of the unobserved ­determinants of ­agricultural ­productivity 
that were correlated with climate variables. They proposed a panel data approach to 
exploit year to year within-country ­variation in weather variables to ­estimate their 
­impact on crop yields or agricultural ­productivity. This approach has been widely 
­applied to estimate the impact of climate change on agricultural ­production ­(Schelnker 
and Roberts 2009; Yu and Babcock 2010; Birthal et al. 2014b, 2014c; Birthal et al. 
2015a; Zaveri and Lobell 2019). 
Employing the fixed effects regression approach to a panel of highly ­disaggregated 
district-level data, Birthal et al. (2014b) assessed the impact of climate change on 
yields of several crops — five rainy season crops (rice, maize, sorghum, pigeon-pea 
and groundnut) and four post-rainy season crops (wheat, barley, chickpea and rape­
seed-mustard). They found that a rise in maximum temperature negatively impacted 
crop yields, but a similar rise in minimum temperature had a positive impact. None­
theless, the positive impact of the rise in minimum temperature is not found sufficient 
to fully compensate for the loss due to the rise in maximum temperature. Guntu­
kula and Goyari (2020) also ­reported similar evidence for some important crops in 
Telangana state. Further, Birthal et al. (2014b) predicted crop yields under different 
plausible climate ­scenarios in 2035, 2065 and 2099, and found a decline in the yield 
of most crops (except rapeseed-mustard) across all time slices. For instance, by 2065, 
7
Climate Change and Risk Management in Indian Agriculture
with an increase of 2.5°C in the annual temperature and no change in the rainfall 
patterns, the yields of the rainy season crops will be lower by ­3.7%-17.3%, and of the 
post-rainy season crops by 4.7%-18.6%. Amongst the rainy season crops, pigeon-pea 
would ­suffer the most (17.3%), followed by rice (11.5%), groundnut (8.6%), sorghum 
(5.3%) and maize (3.7%). In the post-rainy season, chickpea would be more affected 
(18.6%), followed by wheat (15.4%) and barley (4.7%). Mustard is likely to gain but at 
the margin (0.7%). The ­impact would be much larger towards the end of this century. 
Most studies predict likely impact of climate change on food supplies in the 
­plausible future climate scenarios on the assumption of a no change in the ­current 
land use (i.e., acreage allocation to different crops). The ­assumption is quite ­restrictive, 
as there is always a possibility of a change in crops’ ­comparative advantage due to 
­technological change, technical efficiency, ­input costs and output prices. Using a panel 
of district-level data, Birthal et al. (2021b) predicted the impact of climate change 
on cropping patterns in India, presupposing that climate change influences ­farmers’ 
acreage allocation decisions via its effects on crops’ comparative advantage. They 
first predicted crop yields, and then the predicted yields were used to know the likely 
changes in the area shares of crops. The findings are reproduced in Table 1. Under 
the RCP4.5, the yields of the different crops are predicted to be 1.8%-6.6% less in the 
Table 1: Projected Impact of Climate Change on Crop Yields and their Area Shares (%)
	
Rabi	
Kharif	 	
	
	
Wheat	Chickpea	Rapeseed-	Barley		 Paddy	 Maize	 Millets 	Pigeon-	Ground-	Cotton
	
	
	
Mustard	
	
	
	
	
	
pea	
nut	
	
Yield 	 	
	
 Medium-term (2040-2060)	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
 RCP4.5	 -3.10	
-6.61	
-5.08	
-3.76	 	 -5.52	 -4.72	 -3.92	
-5.97	
-3.80	
-1.83
 RCP8.5	 -7.08	
-15.10	
-11.59	
-8.59	 	 -21.22	 -18.13	 -15.06	 -22.95	
-14.60	
-7.03
 Long term (2061-2080)	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
 RCP4.5	 -8.55	
-18.22	
-13.99	
-10.37	 	 -21.81	-18.64	 -15.48	 -23.59	
-15.01	
-7.23
 RCP8.5	 -18.27	 -38.95	
-29.91	
-22.16	 	-43.06	-36.79	 -30.57	 -46.58	 -29.63	 -14.27
	
Area Share 	
	
	
 Medium run (2040-2060)	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
 RCP4.5	 -0.17	
-0.36	
-0.27	
-0.20	 	 -0.30	 0.25	
-0.21	
-0.32	
-0.20	
-0.10
 RCP8.5	 -0.38	
-0.81	
-0.62	
-0.46	 	 -1.14	
0.98	
-0.81	
-1.24	
-0.79	
-0.38
 Long run (2061-2080)	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
 RCP4.5	 -0.46	
-0.98	
-0.75	
-0.56	 	 -1.17	 -1.00	 -0.83	
-1.27	
-0.81	
-0.39
 RCP8.5	 -0.98	
-2.10	
-1.61	
-1.19	 	 -2.32	 1.98	
-1.65	
-2.51	
-1.60	
-0.77
 Source: Birthal et al. (2021b).	
	
	
	
	
	
	
8
Pratap Singh Birthal
­medium-term (2041–2060) and 7.2%-23.6% less in the long-term (2061–2080). Yet, 
this ­heterogeneity in the yield response of crops to temperature is not found to cause 
any perceptible intra-regional and inter-regional shift in the cropping patterns. The 
area shares of crops decline by 0.1-0.4 percentage points in the medium-term, and 
0.4-1.3 percentage points in the long-term. 
Several studies have also estimated the impact of climate change on ­aggregate 
agricultural productivity rather than on yields of individual crops (Sanghi et al. 1998; 
Mendelsohn et al. 2001; Kumar and Parikh 2001; Sanghi and Mendelsohn 2008; 
­Kumar 2011). Their findings show that a probable rise of 2.0°C in annual ­temperature 
and a 7% increase in annual rainfall by 2099 may reduce the productivity of Indian 
agriculture by 8%-12%. Guiteras (2009) estimated short-term as well as long-term 
­impact, and found that with a 0.5°C rise in annual temperature and an increase of 4% 
in annual rainfall ­towards 2039, the agricultural productivity would be ­4.5%-9.0% 
less. ­However, with significant changes in climate by 2099, the damages may ­increase 
beyond 25%. Birthal et al. (2014c) found that with a 1.6°C increase in temperature 
and a 7% increase in rainfall by 2065, the productivity of Indian agriculture was 
­likely to be 15% less. They also compared the impact of climate change on ­agricultural 
­productivity across different agro-climatic zones and found that agriculture would 
­suffer more in the arid and semi-arid tropics than in the humid and semi-arid 
­temperate regions. 
The consequences of climate extremes such as droughts, heat waves, floods, 
­cyclones, and cold waves are more severe than that of a gradual change in ­climate 
change. In India, more than two-thirds of the geographical area is ­exposed to droughts, 
with a probability of 35% occurrence at the ­national level, varying from 20% in the 
­dry-humid regions to 40% or more in the arid regions ­(Government of India 2009). 
Indian agriculture, therefore, remains a gamble on the monsoons, and this makes it 
imperative to understand the crops’ ­response to the timings of monsoon or its with­
in-season distribution. A few studies ­(Rosenzweig and Binswanger 1993; Jain et al. 
2015; Kala 2017; Singh et al. 2020) have assessed the impact of a delayed monsoon 
on the yields of the rainy season and post-rainy season crops, and found that delayed 
­monsoon ­reduces the yields. Singh et al. (2020) had shown that a 10-days delay in 
the ­onset of monsoon from its normal date of arrival could potentially reduce yields 
of rainy ­season crops by 1.6%-5%, and of post-rainy season crops by ­1.1%-1.9%. This 
9
Climate Change and Risk Management in Indian Agriculture
means that ­delayed monsoon not only adversely affects the yields of rainy season crops, 
but also of post-rainy season crops through the residual soil ­moisture.  
Using the farmers’ self-assessed crop losses due to different climate risks from 
a nationally representative survey of farm households (i.e., Situation ­Assessment 
­Survey of Agricultural Households) conducted in 2012-13 by the National Sample 
Survey Office, Birthal et al. (2019a) had shown that, at any point of time, about one-
third of the farm households were exposed to ­production risks and suffer an income 
loss of over 12%. Drought is the most ­important cause of loss (47%), followed by pests 
(27%) and floods (20%). Table 2 shows the ­values of crop outputs and the value lost 
due to different ­production risks. Fruits, ­vegetables, plantation crops and cotton are 
more remunerative to ­produce, but these are also more prone to production risks. 
Nevertheless, as a proportion of the potential output, the loss in these crops is smaller 
than in staple food crops. Interestingly, drought remains the most important cause of 
loss in most crops, except vegetables and plantation crops that suffer more from insect 
pests and diseases than from droughts and floods. 
The possibility of the self-reported losses being overestimated cannot be overruled. 
Using a panel dataset on rice-growing districts, Birthal et al. (2015a) ­constructed an 
index of droughts multiplying the excess temperature and ­deficit rainfall, as against its 
rainfall-based official measure2 and estimated a loss of 3.5% on average for ­1969-2005 
(Table 3). The yield was hardly affected by the low-intensity droughts, but the severe 
droughts had reduced it by 13.5%, and the moderate droughts by 2.2%. Importantly, 
Table 2: Returns and Loss in Different Crops by Source of Risk (Rs/ha)
  Crop	
Gross Returns	
Output Loss by Cause 
	
	
Droughts	
Pests	
Floods	
Others	
Total
  Fruits	
232046	
10653	
5475	
8445	
2838	
27410 
  Sugarcane	
148678	
9357	
5139	
5391	
436	
20323
  Plantation	
134194	
4469	
4923	
4612	
2189	
16193
  Vegetables	
97535	
3763	
4403	
1121	
759	
10046
  Cotton	
52963	
11698	
1279	
1332	
470	
14779
  Paddy	
49465	
2831	
970	
1001	
225	
5027
  Oilseeds	
45391	
4016	
2137	
1374	
489	
8015
  Wheat	
44677	
1206	
1397	
1247	
418	
4268
  Pulses	
43880	
3786	
2705	
1590	
271	
8352
  Coarse cereals	
24834	
4268	
1504	
945	
180	
6897
  Total	
59510	
3875	
2239	
1607	
492	
8213
Source: Birthal et al. (2019a).
10
Pratap Singh Birthal
they also observed a decline in the frequency of severe droughts and also the yield loss 
associated with these. 
Tripathi and Sindhi (2020), on the assumption of a significant correlation ­between 
droughts and heat waves, estimated deviations in yields of 10 major crops in a drought/
heat wave year over their previous normal, and as expected, crop yields in a drought 
or heat wave year were lesser and the differences were bigger in case of severe events. 
Heat stress is becoming a big threat to the sustainable improvement of crop yields 
in India, especially of post-rainy season crops like wheat. Gupta et al. (2010), in their 
assessment of the impact of the 2010 terminal heat wave on wheat crop in Punjab, 
found that the heat wave reduced its yield by 1.3% to 21.5%. Chakraborty et al. (2019) 
also evaluated the impact of the 2010 heat wave on wheat yield in northern states 
and found it to have reduced the yield by 3.5-4.9%. Using the satellite data on the 
daily ­temperature at different growth stages of wheat, Lobell et al. (2012) estimated 
that a 2°C rise in temperature beyond the threshold level of 34°C during the ­anthesis 
and grain filling stages could reduce yield by 10%-14%. Utilising a long series of the 
­district-level data, Zaveri and Lobell (2019) showed a reduction in wheat yield by 
about 5%, when the growing-period temperature crossed the assumed fixed ­threshold 
level of 30°C. 
The fixed temperature thresholds, as in Lobell et al. (2012) and Zaveri and 
­Lobell (2019), are considered ambiguous, especially in a large country like India that 
Table 3: Rice Yield Loss due to Droughts in India
 Period	
Severity of Drought	
% of Total Events	
% Yield Loss
	
Low	
2.7	
0.9
1969-2005	
Moderate	
82.7	
-2.2
	
Severe	
14.6	
-13.5
	
All 	
100	
-3.5
	
Low	
2.3	
3.0
1969-1987	
Moderate	
76.8	
-3.6
	
Severe	
20.9	
-16.8
	
All 	
100	
-1.8
	
Low	
3.1	
0.2
1988-2005	
Moderate	
88.4	
-1.3
	
Severe	
8.5	
-8.1
	
All 	
100	
-1.8
Source: Birthal et al. (2015a).
11
Climate Change and Risk Management in Indian Agriculture
 exhibit considerable heterogeneity in agro-climatic conditions in terms of frequency, 
 intensity and persistence of excess temperature. Birthal et al. (2021c) constructed a 
location-specific measure of heat stress taking into  account the frequency, intensity 
and  persistence of excess temperature beyond its uniquely identified threshold at each 
location, that is, district; and regressed wheat yield on district-specific time-varying 
indices of heat stress. They found heat stress negatively impacting the crop yield, and 
the impact became  stronger over time. On average, crop yield was reduced by about 
3%. Further, they reported that the measure of heat stress built on multiple aspects of 
excess  temperature  explained variation in yield better than does a single aspect of it. 
Most studies have assessed the impact of one type of climatic event at a time, 
while in practice farmers face multiple climate risks in a crop growing season. This 
gives rise to the problem of attribution. Utilising information from the Emergency 
Events Database (EM-DAT), Birthal et al. (2021a)  created a state-level panel of four 
climatic hazards, namely, droughts, floods, heat waves and cold waves, for 1970-2018, 
and assessed their impact on agricultural  productivity growth. All the climatic haz-
ards were found to negatively impact productivity growth, but different hazards had 
differential impact. Droughts and heat waves had a large negative impact compared 
to floods and cold waves. On average, the climatic hazards slowed down agricultural 
productivity growth by 25%, but more in the low-income and agrarian states.
There is a plethora of evidence on the impact of climate change on  cereals,  pulses 
and oilseeds, but only limited evidences are found on its impact on  horticultural and 
plantation crops (i.e., fruits, vegetables, spices, aromatic and medicinal plants),  
dairying, fisheries and poultry. It is instructive to note that these commodities  together 
account for approximately 60% of the  agricultural gross value added (GVA), and their 
contribution has been growing faster, over 5% a year, than the overall  agricultural 
growth of 3.4%. Further, their  cultivation is labour-intensive, and is concentrated 
among the marginal and small farm households (Birthal et al. 2014a). That means any 
reduction in their outputs would directly translate into a negative effect on the 
livelihoods of smallholder farmers, who are a force to reckon within the country. 
Only a few studies have assessed the impact of climate change on  high-value  
commodities, and the evidence is mostly anecdotal. Kumar and Aggarwal (2013)  reported 
climate change to benefit coconut plantations along the  western coast, but it was found to 
cause a significant loss in its yield in the eastern region.  Changes in the rainfall pattern 
12
Pratap Singh Birthal
were found to significantly ­affect tea production in Assam ­(Nowogrodzki, 2019). With 
climate change, the Arabica coffee plantations are likely to lose, and may shift to higher 
altitudes (Merga and Alemayehu, 2019). 
Climate change impact animal husbandry, directly as well as indirectly. The ­direct 
effects are due to the animals’ exposure to climate extremes, and the ­indirect effects 
are via changes in the quantity and quality of different types of feed (crop ­by-products, 
green fodders and concentrate feed), availability of ­water and pest ­infestation 
­(Rojas-Dowing et al. 2017). Climate risks to plants and animals in home gardens 
have started becoming visible in West Bengal (Jana and Roy 2020). ­Thermal stress 
affects the quantity and quality of milk, and the bodyweight of goats ­(Rojas-Dowing 
et al. 2017). According to an ­estimate, by 2050 the climate change may reduce India’s 
milk production by 15 million tons (NPCC 2012; Upadhyay et al. 2013). Crossbreeds 
are more sensitive to ­climate change or thermal heat stress than their indigenous 
­counterparts. In the Trans and Upper Gangetic plains of India, the heat stress would 
cause a loss of milk production worth Rs. 24 billion by 2039 (Choudhary 2017). ­Poultry 
­production is highly vulnerable to heat stress. An increase in temperature from 31.6°C 
to 37.9°C has been reported to decrease feed consumption by 36% and egg ­production 
by 7.5% (NPCC 2012). An increase in temperature beyond 42°C may cause mortality. 
Climate change also affects fish production. It may ­alter the abundance and distri­
bution of marine fish species, and their breeding and migration patterns. It is also 
likely to exacerbate the negative impact due to changes in zoo and phytoplankton, 
sea ­surface temperatures, precipitation changes, seawater acidification, sea surface 
­salinity and oxygen deficiency. 
Although the literature on the impact of climate change on crop yields and/­
agricultural productivity in India has increased considerably in the past two decades, 
there are several gaps in it. These are as follows:
(i)	
Our understanding of the impact of climate change on high-­value 
­agriculture, including horticultural crops, dairying and animal ­husbandry 
and ­fisheries, is limited. Notably, high-value agriculture is expected to drive 
the future growth of agriculture, but is also more ­vulnerable to climate and 
other risks. The research efforts should, therefore, be made to quantify 
the impact of climate change on ­high-value crops, animal husbandry and 
­fisheries. 
13
Climate Change and Risk Management in Indian Agriculture
(ii)	
Agriculture in India remains a gamble on the monsoons, despite a 
­considerable expansion of irrigation infrastructure. Predictions ­indicate 
a little or no change in the quantum of rainfall but ­significant changes in 
its within-season distribution. This suggests a need to probe the relation­
ship between the timings of rainfall and crop ­performance further. Our 
­understanding of the impact of heat stress at different growth stages of crops 
is also limited; hence, it is important to know ‘how variations in temperature 
at different stages of crop development influence its performance’. 
(iii) 	 The quality of natural endowment at a location, especially soils and ground­
water, do matter in shaping the climate change impact on ­agriculture, in 
terms of crop choices and crop yields. Yet, our ­understanding of the role of 
the quality of natural resources, ­especially soils in moderating the impact of 
climate change on agriculture is ­limited. For the location-specific adaptation 
strategies, it is essential to know how the natural endowments influence the 
impact of climate change on agriculture. 
(iv)	 Most studies have assessed the likely changes in crop yields and food ­supplies 
due to climate change on the assumption that the current cropping pattern 
will persist in the future too. Crops differ in their response to climate change, 
and there is a possibility of a change in crops’ comparative ­advantage in the 
­plausible future climate ­scenarios, hence, on the farmers’ preferences for crops. 
Studies are required on ‘how climate change will influence intra-regional and 
inter-regional shifts in land-use within agriculture in the short and long run’. 
(v)	
Climate change manifests in several forms such as droughts, floods, heat 
waves, cold waves, hailstorms and cyclones, and these extreme events have 
not been subjected to a rigorous analysis for their impact on individual 
crops or aggregate agricultural productivity. Empirical evidence is required 
on the relative impact of each climatic shock on crop yields and/or over­
all ­productivity of agriculture in order to devise and prioritise strategies to 
manage them (Khatri-Chhetri et al. 2017).  
(vi)	 Finally, the literature on climate impact has remained concentrated on the 
upstream of the agricultural supply chains. There is a very high ­probability 
that climate risks will transmit downstream the ­supply chain, influencing 
14
Pratap Singh Birthal
the efficiency and sustainability of ­different ­segments of the chain. ­Studies 
are required to understand the ­mechanisms of vertical transmission of 
­climate risks and their impact on chain ­activities and actors.  
3. Risk Management Strategies
Farmers do not tolerate the risks to their livelihoods passively. Depending on
the probabilities of weather aberration, farmers modulate their attitude towards 
risk, ­access to information and finances, and resource endowments, and use many 
­traditional agronomic practices to manage production risks (Bhattamishra and 
­Barrett 2010; Jodha et al. 2012). Bahinipati et al. (2021) from a review of India-­specific 
studies found a dearth of evidence on risk ­mitigation.  
To manage the climate risks, farmers generally rely on the ­traditional ­agricultural 
practices such as the use of stress-tolerant crops, changes in ­planting dates and 
­input applications, including that of irrigation and ­fertilizers, and soil and ­water 
­conservation techniques; and to a limited extent on the ­formal ­measures, for ­example, 
crop ­insurance. These measures, based on their risk functions, can be ­classified 
into three distinct risk management ­strategies, namely, (i) risk-mitigating, (ii) risk 
­transferring and (iii) risk coping. In the ­following paragraphs, we discuss a few 
­important ­measures or ­strategies used by the Indian farmers for managing climate 
risks and their impact on ­agricultural productivity and risk exposure. 
Crop Diversification: Crop diversification is an ex-ante means of risk 
­management. It is widely practiced in smallholder-dominated agrarian ­economies, 
where the farmers lack information, technologies and finances for risk management. 
Crops differ in their requirements of water and temperature, and thus they respond 
differently to changes in climate variables. Risk-averse farmers prefer a ­portfolio of 
crops with low-correlated returns. In case a crop does not perform against a ­climatic 
shock, then the loss in farm income, to an extent, can be compensated by the gain 
in income from another crop that can better tolerate that climatic shock. Crop 
­diversification is, thus, considered an important means of improving ­productivity, 
sustainability and resilience of ­agriculture (Thrupp 1997; Tamburini et al. 2020). 
In the Indian context, Birthal and Hazrana (2019) showed that crop diversification 
­enhanced the ­resilience of agriculture to excess temperature as well as deficit rainfall, 
and the resilience ­benefits were more visible in the long run. 
15
Climate Change and Risk Management in Indian Agriculture
From a meta-analysis of more than 5,000 pieces of empirical evidence, ­Tamburini 
et al. (2020) found crop diversification as multifunctional — it ­reduced the use of 
­external inputs, enhances ecosystem services, regulates climate, ­mitigates green­
house gas emission and offset the adverse effects of climatic shocks on farm income. 
­Studies had investigated the impact of crop diversification on agricultural ­productivity 
(Joshi et al. 2004; Birthal et al. 2015b), and they had shown that ­horticulture-based 
­diversification was more remunerative despite the horticultural crops being ­perishable 
and more prone to climate risks. Birthal et al. (2021d) had evaluated the impact of 
crop diversification on agricultural productivity and risk exposure in India, and they 
found that crop diversification was efficient at improving agricultural productivity 
and ­reducing downside risk exposure, and its productivity benefits far outweighed 
the risk benefits. 
Irrigation: Irrigation is an ex-ante as well as an ex-post adaptation to ­climate 
change, and it plays a dual role in enhancing crop yields and reducing their ­sensitivity 
to climate change. The productivity benefits of irrigation have been widely ­studied, 
but its role in risk reduction has not been investigated except in a few studies 
­(Kurukulasuriya et al. 2006; Bonfils and Lobell 2007; Mendelsohn and Seo 2007; 
­Kurukulasuriya et al. 2011; Birthal et al. 2015a, Birthal et al. 2021c; Taraz 2018; 
­Zaveri and Lobell 2019). 
A few studies have explicitly demonstrated the contribution of irrigation in 
r­educing the sensitivity of crop yields to climate risks (Birthal et al. 2015a; Taraz 
2018; Zaveri and Lobell 2019; Birthal et al. 2021c). Notably, these studies have relied 
on a common data source, and arrived at an almost similar conclusion that i­rrigation 
improves crop yields and reduces their sensitivity to extreme climatic events, mainly 
droughts and heat stress. In the case of rice, Birthal et al. (2015a) found irrigation 
to moderate the harmful effect of droughts, ­besides having a strong positive impact 
on its yield. Zaveri and Lobell (2019) and Birthal et al. (2021c) also reported ­similar 
evidence in the case of heat stress in wheat. Singh et al. (2020) found irrigation 
­lessening the adverse ­impact of delayed monsoon on yields of rainy as well as post-
rainy season crops. Taraz (2018) too found irrigation offsetting the negative impact 
of excess temperature on yields of several crops. A few of these studies (Birthal et al. 
2015a; Birthal et al. 2021c), however, showed a slow-down in the adaptation benefits 
of irrigation. 
16
Pratap Singh Birthal
Stress-Tolerant Seeds: Crop breeding for stress tolerance is one of the most 
­effective means of offsetting the negative impact of climate change on agriculture. The 
stress-tolerant traits embedded in seed act as an insurance against climate stress, and 
also reduce pressure on scarce water ­resources ­(Lybbert and Bell 2010). In the recent 
past, studies from several African ­countries have shown that the adoption of drought-
tolerant varieties of maize reduces the ­probability of crop failure and without any 
yield penalty (Wossen et al. 2017; Teklewold et al. 2017; Amondo et al. 2019). In India, 
Birthal et al. (2011) ­assessed the ­economic benefits from the adoption of a drought-
tolerant variety of groundnut and attributed 33%-46% of the economic ­benefits 
from its adoption to the ­reduction in variance in its yield. Birthal et al. (2015a), in 
their ­assessment of the impact of irrigation on drought-proofing of rice ­production 
­systems, ­reported that besides irrigation, the improved crop varieties and ­agronomic 
practices too contributed to the resilience against droughts. Dar et al. (2018) reported 
­significant yield benefits from the adoption of ­submergence-tolerance rice in eastern 
­India, and the benefits were more visible with an ­increase in the days of flooding. 
Agronomic Management: Several agronomic practices confer ­adaptation 
­benefits against climate change. These include adjustments of ­sowing and ­planting 
dates, inter-cultural operations, no-till sowing, mulching, direct ­seeding and alternate 
wet and drying in rice, manipulations of ­fertilizer applications, and so on. Pathak et 
al. (2019) reported significant adaptation ­benefits from the adoption of direct ­seeding 
and alternate wet and dry systems in rice production. Sapkota et al. (2015) found 
­no-till sowing of wheat to ­provide an effective solution to terminal heat stress. Gupta 
et al. (2010) reported that the balanced application of plant nutrients, especially of 
potash, helped wheat to beat the heat.   
Crop Insurance: Crop insurance is an important ex-ante means of risk 
­management. It transfers the expected crop loss from farmers to ­financial ­institutions 
against a pre-determined fee or premium. India introduced a crop insurance scheme 
on a pilot basis in 1972, and since then this scheme has evolved considerably in terms 
of coverage of crops, beneficiaries and ­regions, premium and government support. 
India now implements the Pradhan ­Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (Prime Minister’s Crop 
Insurance Scheme). The premium rate ­under this scheme is heavily subsidized, but 
its uptake has not been as ­expected. Only about one-fourth of the farm households 
subscribe to this scheme, and a majority of them hails from the rainfed regions.  
17
Climate Change and Risk Management in Indian Agriculture
Several studies have investigated reasons behind the poor adoption of crop 
­insurance in India (Gine et al. 2008; Clarke 2011; Binswanger-Mkhize 2012; Cole et 
al. 2013; Mukherjee and Pal 2017, Gulati et al. 2018; Aditya et al. 2018; Cariappa et al. 
2020), and most of these point towards farmers’ lack of liquidity, access to credit and 
information, and the behavioural factors such as the rate of time preference as ­major 
constraints to its adoption. Gine et al.  (2008) ­narrated that farmers’ ­perceptions of 
the uncertainty in the ­distribution of ­benefits of ­insurance made it difficult for them 
to decide whether or not to buy the ­insurance contract. On the supply side, the higher 
­administrative and ­transaction costs and delays in claim settlements were pointed 
out as the main reasons for its poor uptake (Binswanger-Mkhize 2012; Gulati et 
al. 2018; ­Cariappa et al. 2020). Policy distortions in the credit and input markets 
(such as ­frequent loan wave-offs and input subsidies) also discouraged farmers from 
­purchasing insurance contracts (Mukherjee and Pal, 2017; Gulati et al. 2018). 
Notwithstanding this, there is a scarcity of empirical studies on the ­impact of crop 
insurance on farm income and risk exposure. Cariappa et al. (2020) reported a ­positive 
effect of crop insurance on farm income, while ­Aditya et al. (2018) found no ­conclusive 
evidence of the impact being positive. ­Further, most studies from ­India or elsewhere 
have investigated the income effect of crop ­insurance, but ignored its ­effect on down­
side risk exposure or ­probability of crop failure. More importantly, these ­studies 
­assess the impact of crop ­insurance in isolation of other mitigation and ­adaptation 
­measures. Binswanger-Mkhize (2012) argued, “the cost of the ­insurance premium that 
the f­armer is willing to pay is first limited by how much better (or worse) the formal 
insurance ­mechanism would insure him relative to the informal one, and second by 
the cost savings he would realize from reducing his informal ­insurance ­mechanisms 
and switching to a formal insurance…. The empirical ­literature has ­ignored the fact 
that the additional risk benefits from formal ­insurance may be quite small relative to 
the cost of switching from an informal to a formal insurance ­mechanism”.
Empirical evidence on income and risk benefits of crop insurance vis-à-vis other 
adaptation measures is limited. Studies from the developed countries showed crop 
­insurance was inefficient at reducing risk as compared to irrigation (Dalton et al. 2004; 
Barham et al. 2011; Vigani and Kathage 2019). On the other hand, Di Falco et al. (2014) 
found crop diversification to be an efficient substitute for crop insurance. Birthal et al. 
(2021e) examined the income and risk benefits of crop insurance ­vis-à-vis irrigation 
18
Pratap Singh Birthal
in Indian agriculture, and found that farmers benefit from both, but crop insurance 
was relatively less beneficial than irrigation. Independently, crop insurance helped 
improve farm income by 6.9%, which was lower than the ­contribution of ­irrigation 
(19.7%). Crop insurance reduced downside risk exposure by 6.8% and irrigation by 
13.7%, but the benefits of their joint adoption were much larger. 
Social Safety Nets: The Government of India has been implementing a 
­nationwide rural employment guarantee scheme, called ‘Mahatma ­Gandhi ­National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA)’, that assures ­employment of 100 
days to a household. Although the scheme is not meant for addressing climate risks, 
it ­contributes toward enhancing the resilience of agriculture (Fischer 2020; Patnaik, 
et al. 2019). Preethan et al. (2020) identified that about two-thirds of the ­permissible 
work under MGNREGA were related to the management of natural resources and 
agricultural activities. Furthermore, participation in MGNREGA eased financial 
constraints on the adoption of the direct risk-coping measures (Hansen et al. 2019, 
Patnaik, et al. 2019). Birthal et al. (2021f) found that participants of the MGNREGA 
scheme were better motivated to adopt risk management practices in agriculture, and 
their participation helped reduce their exposure to downside risks.  
The Government of India also implements a National Food Security Act, 2013, 
which provides for affordable access to food to the poor. An ­eligible ­household can 
purchase his/her entitlement of food from the public ­distribution system (PDS) at 
heavily subsidised prices. Like the MGNREGA the ­subsidised ­provision of food is also 
hypothesized to motivate farmers to adopt risk ­management strategies. But, contrary 
to this, the poor households accessing food security nets were found not inclined to 
adopt risk management measures (Birthal et al. 2021f). 
Multiple Climate-Smart Practices: Risk-averse farmers, ­depending on 
their resource endowments, and access to agricultural technologies, ­information and 
­credit, often use more than one risk management measure at a time. From a ­nationally 
­representative survey of farm households, Birthal et al. (2021f) ­identified several 
­measures that farmers use knowingly or ­unknowingly to manage climate risks. These 
include, one, risk-mitigating measures such as the ­diversification into high-­value 
crops, animal husbandry and non-farm ­business activities; two, risk ­transferring 
measures such as crop insurance and renting-out of land; and three, risk-coping 
­measures such as guaranteed wage employment, out-migration, ­remittances and 
19
Climate Change and Risk Management in Indian Agriculture
livestock sales. The frequency distribution of these measures by their risk ­function 
is presented in Table 4. Risk mitigation is the widely adopted strategy — more than 
three-fourths of the farm households have adopted it, and is followed by risk coping 
(31%) and risk ­transfer (10%) ­strategies. 
Going ahead, Birthal et al. (2021f) also evaluated the impact of these risk manage­
ment strategies and combinations thereof by employing the ­multinomial endogenous 
regime-switching regression technique. They found that all the risk management 
strategies (mitigation, transfer and coping) ­benefited f­armers, but it was the ­mitigation 
strategy that appeared more efficient at increasing farm income and ­reducing risk 
­exposure (Table 5). Further, they found joint ­adoption of these ­strategies more 
­efficient than individual strategies in ­isolation. The joint adoption of risk ­management 
­strategies, however, was observed scale-dependent and costlier, but with the liquidity 
and information constraints ­relaxed, it was likely to find favour among the small­
holder farmers.
A review of the adaptation literature shows that a majority of ­farmers ­largely rely 
on their own risk management strategies, and they derive ­significant ­income and risk 
Table 4:  Frequency Distribution of Risk Management Measures Practiced by Farm 
Households
 Measure/Strategy	
No. of Households 	
% of Total
 No risk management	
5,385	
15.30
 Risk mitigation	
	
  Cultivation of horticultural crops	
11,007	
31.27
  Ownership of the non-farm business 	
1,883	
5.35
  Ownership of livestock 	
21,740	
62.11
 Risk transfer
  Subscribe crop insurance	
2,202	
6.23
  Renting-out of land	
1,447	
4.11
 Risk coping
  Guaranteed employment (MGNREGA)	
4,684	
13.31
  Out-migration	
2,353	
6.68
  Remittances	
3,734	
10.61
  Livestock sales	
1,500	
4.26
 Total number of households 	
35,200	
Notes: 	1.	The sum of individual measures is not equal to the total number of households 
	
	 because of the use of more than one measure by several households.  
	
2.	MGNREGA = Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act.
Source: Birthal et al. (2021f).
20
Pratap Singh Birthal
benefits from adopting these. Nevertheless, the ­literature on the adoption and impact 
of risk management measures/strategies is not ­sufficient enough to draw creditable 
conclusions for their ­mainstreaming into the ­agricultural development agenda. More 
research is required on the ­following issues:    
(i)	
Preparation of an inventory of farmers’ risk adaptation measures, ­including 
the traditional and modern, formal and informal, direct and indirect 
­measures, for different climatic risks, and prioritise these based on ­farmers’ 
opinions on their potential net adaptation benefits or trade-off between 
­income and risk benefits. 
(ii)	 The concept of ‘climate smart agriculture’ has started gaining ground 
in smallholder-dominated agrarian economies. This concept derives its 
strength from scientific innovations and agronomic practices but ignores 
­several ­traditional agronomic practices. Altieri and Nicholls (2013) argue 
that in ­developing countries, the integration of scientific innovations and 
­traditional practices could be an important means of increasing ­productivity, 
­sustainability and resilience of agriculture. It is, therefore, important to 
­develop optimal crop- and ­location-specific combinations or packages of 
climate-smart practices blending the ­scientific innovations and the farmers’ 
self-risk adjustment ­practices. Also, there is a need to conduct more studies 
on the income and risk benefits of different adaptation measures and their 
combinations against different climatic shocks. 
(iii)	 Farmers’ face several technological, informational, attitudinal, socio-­cultural, 
financial and institutional barriers to the adoption of risk ­management 
Table 5: Average Treatment Effects of Risk Management Strategies 
(% Change had the Adopters not Adopted)
  Strategy	
Mean Farm Income 	
Variance	
Skewness
  Risk mitigation	
24.51	
-16.64	
11.20
  Risk transfer	
14.35	
-11.75	
6.83
  Risk coping	
10.42	
-10.22	
13.02
  Risk mitigation + transfer	
40.58	
-18.87	
12.90
  Risk mitigation + coping	
15.41	
-17.13	
10.86
  Risk transfer + coping	
16.80	
-15.11	
12.35
  Risk mitigation + transfer + coping	
32.23	
-20.17	
15.84
Note: A positive sign of skewness means a reduction in exposure to downside risk.
Source: Birthal et al. (2021f).
21
Climate Change and Risk Management in Indian Agriculture
­strategies (Singh et al. 2019). The socio-economic ­research on adaptation 
­barriers is still evolving. Hence, the need for more ­studies on the ­identification 
and prioritisation of constraints to the adoption of climate-smart ­technologies 
and practices cannot be ­undermined. 
4. Policies and Institutions 
The state can play a significant role in making agriculture resilient to ­climate change 
by, one, designing the context-specific policies and programmes, and ­ensuring their 
effective implementation through better coordination across ­different ­administrative 
levels for the smooth flow of information, knowledge and resources to the farmers; 
and, two, convergence of different programmes ­operated by different ministries and 
departments for efficient and sustainable use of financial and human resources. 
Targeting Climate Change Adaptation: Often, there is a ­disconnect ­between 
micro-level realities and macro-economic policies because of the poor coordination 
among different administrative levels, and the lack of ­understanding of nature and 
the level of efforts or investment needed at ­different a­dministrative levels (Singh et al. 
2014; Singh et al. 2019). Climate risk is ­covariate and systemic, hence, an ­effective risk 
management ­strategy should evolve from a sound understanding of the distribution of 
risk at ­multiple ­administrative or ­geographical levels. Agrawal et al. (2012) argued that 
for the location-specific implementation of mitigation and ­adaptation ­strategies, it was 
important to ­understand differences in the characteristics of ­locations, ­populations, 
­governance structures and socio-political dimensions. From an analysis of several 
adaptation projects spread across more than 40 least ­developed countries, Agrawal et 
al. (2012) offered four major lessons for ­adaptation planning: (i) ­improvement in the 
local capacity through transfer of information and financial and technical resources; 
(ii) empowerment of the communities and local governments for decentralisation of 
the adaptation planning and implementation; (iii) creation of the mechanisms for 
­information sharing among decision makers across sectors and ­levels of decision 
making; and, (iv) improvement in the accountability of local ­decision ­makers to their 
constituents. 
Birthal et al. (2019b) had empirically shown the importance of decentra­lisation 
of administrative management for drought-proofing. Using a ­multi-level ­modelling 
approach, they identified five geographical or ­administrative ­hierarchical layers, 
22
Pratap Singh Birthal
namely, household, village, district, region and state, and found household and state 
to receive a larger emphasis in a risk management project. Further, they ­suggested 
that the ­benefits of a risk ­management project should reach farmers through ­effective 
coordination at the intermediate levels. Notably, most state governments in ­India 
have formulated their action plans under the National Action Plan on ­Climate 
Change (NAPCC) and also have ready-to-implement district-level contingency plans 
­developed by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR). Nevertheless, 
these are not ­effectively implemented because of the weak coordination at adminis­
trative levels below the state, that is, districts, blocks and village panchayats (Singh 
et al. 2019). Birthal et al. (2019b) suggested a greater role of village-level institutions 
(such as ­panchayats) for coordination with the higher administrative levels for funds, 
­technologies and skill development. 
Mainstreaming of Programmes and Policies: The central and state 
­governments implement several agricultural and rural development ­programmes 
through various ministries and departments. Many of these are related to climate 
change adaptations directly or indirectly. Singh et al. (2017) identified 161 such 
schemes of the central government scattered over ­different ministries and depart­
ments, and these accounted for about one-fourth of the budgetary allocation. But, 
there was a lack of synergy among these. A ­coordinated approach, by pooling of 
finances and ­resources, could ­enhance ­efficiency, sustainability and inclusiveness 
of such schemes (Singh et al. 2017). A typical example is of the works under the 
­MGNREGA scheme which is implemented by the ­Ministry of Rural Development 
and Panchayati Raj, ­Government of India. About two-thirds of its works are related 
to agriculture and ­natural resource ­management; for instance, water conservation 
and water ­harvesting, drought ­proofing, ­afforestation, irrigation works, restora­
tion of traditional ­water ­bodies, land development, flood control and construction 
of ­rural roads. All these activities are closely linked to the adaptation options for 
climate change. Hence, there is a huge scope for harnessing the complementarities 
of different schemes. 
Financing Climate-Resilient Agriculture: Finance is essential for devel­
oping a climate-resilient agri-food system. For smallholder farmers, it is difficult to 
access finance because they lack tangible assets acceptable as ­collateral and fewer 
alternative income sources. Commercial banks and ­other financial institutions often 
23
Climate Change and Risk Management in Indian Agriculture
shy away from financing smallholder farmers  because of the high transactions cost 
and lending risks. 
Can increased access and flow of credit to farmers help them to manage  production 
risks? The evidence is scarce. Birthal et al. (2021f) found that farm households that 
had access to institutional finance were better motivated to adopt climate-smart 
 agricultural practices and technologies. 
Farmers need short-term credit for the purchase of inputs and long-term credit 
to invest in on-farm infrastructure for mitigation and adaptation to  climate change. 
 Access to climate finance may reduce farmers’ risk aversion, and thus motivate them to 
invest in on-farm infrastructure like solar and wind  energy for pump  irrigation.  Public 
policies can catalyze climate-smart  investment by mainstreaming climate-smart 
principles into agricultural  policies. For  instance, the subsidized and  collateral-free 
loans to small-scale producers should be made conditional upon the implementation 
of climate-smart agricultural practices. The need is to develop customised climate 
 financial products suiting the needs of farmers. 
Funding Agricultural Research: Technology is perhaps one of the most 
 important means of improving productivity, sustainability and  resilience of 
 agriculture. In the quest of being self-sufficient in food, India’s  National  Agricultural 
Research System (NARS) has largely focused on increasing crop yields, giving  little 
attention to improving stress-tolerant traits in crops.  Recognising the emerging 
threats of  climate change to agriculture and food security, it  becomes imperative to 
re-orient the agricultural research agenda focusing on breeding stress-tolerant crop 
varieties and developing resource management practices that mitigate climate change 
impact. This would  require additional finances for agricultural research to leverage its 
potential to  generate climate-smart technologies and practices. Evidence shows that 
return on  investment on breeding for climate resilience is quite attractive  (Gautam 
2009; Mottaleb et al. 2012).  However, agricultural research in India remains under- 
invested; it receives about 0.4% of the agricultural GVA, which is lesser than 
in  developed countries (2%-2.5%).  
In 2011, the ICAR launched a project called National Innovations on  Climate  
Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) with an aim to enhance the  resilience of  agriculture  
(including crops, livestock and fisheries) through strategic  research,  technology 
24
Pratap Singh Birthal
­demonstration and partnerships with state agricultural universities, Krishi V­igyan 
­Kendras (KVKs) and non-governmental organisations (NGOs). To an extent, NICRA has 
succeeded in evolving climate-resilient technologies and practices and ­demonstrating 
their potential benefits. The need is to scale up technology ­demonstrations.   
Climate and Advisory Services:  Farmers would be more exposed to extreme 
changes in climate, and to manage these, they would require more ­information on 
weather forecasts and climate-smart practices on a regular ­basis. In this context, 
­information and communication technology (ICT) can play an important role. In 
­rural India, there are 277 million internet users (wbcsd.org/download/file/12275), 
and about 20 million of them subscribe to short ­message service (SMS) advisories 
(Rathore and ­Chattopadhyay 2016). ­According to ­Rathore and Chattopadhyay (2016), 
the adoption of ­agromet ­services can ­reduce the cost of cultivation by about 25% and 
can increase net ­returns by 83%. These findings indicate that there is huge scope for 
­public-private ­partnerships in ­creating localised digital platforms for climate ­services 
and advisories. It may be noted that the next-generation climate ­advisories must have 
improved context-specific contents and ensure timeliness in delivery (Rao et al. 2020). 
This discussion clearly suggests the need for an evidence-based climate ­policy 
within a broader agricultural policy framework that considers the ­linkages and com­
plementarities among projects and programmes scattered across ­ministries and de­
partments, and greater coordination between the ­national and subnational adminis­
trative entities including the states, districts, blocks and villages. However, there is a 
need to critically examine the following issues: 
(i)	
Understand the mechanisms of implementation of the climate ­adaptation 
projects and the administrative, financial, informational and human re­
source constraints to their implementation. An understanding of these can 
be gained through an analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of the exist­
ing adaptation projects at different ­administrative levels. 
(ii)	
Examine the linkages between different programmes or ­projects ­operated 
by different ministries and departments, and assess the ­potential ­social, 
economic and environmental benefits of their ­convergence. 
(iii) 	 Explore the opportunities and constraints in financing adaptation to 
­climate change across the agricultural supply chain from genetics to end-­
25
Climate Change and Risk Management in Indian Agriculture
consumption, and prospects for private sector participation in ­climate 
­finance. 
(iv)	 Estimate the return on investment in research on climate-resilient ­activities 
such as crop breeding for stress tolerance and ­management of natural 
­resources, and also return on investment in agromet ­advisory services.
5. Conclusions and Implications
Climate change has become a big threat to the sustainable development of agri­
culture, food and nutrition security, and the livelihoods of smallholder farmers. The 
predictions suggest a significant rise in surface temperature and in the frequency of 
different climate extremes such as droughts, floods and heat and cold waves in the 
plausible future climate scenarios. An increase of 1.5°C in the mean temperature is 
envisaged to severely affect crop yields and food ­supplies, human and animal health, 
and ­ecosystem services. Towards the end of this century, India’s mean surface tempe-
rature under the moderate greenhouse concentration pathway RCP4.5 is expected to 
increase by 1.57°C over its current level in 2019. This paper undertakes a ­critical ­review 
of ­literature on the climate change impact on Indian agriculture and their manage­
ment, with an aim to understand critical gaps in the existing literature, and to draw 
­lessons for the required reorientations of the agricultural research, ­institutional and 
policy landscapes for enhancing efficiency, sustainability and resilience of ­agriculture. 
The main conclusion is that climate change negatively impacts crop yields and 
agricultural productivity, but the negative impact can partially be ­offset ­using modern 
and traditional adaptation measures with appropriate ­institutional and policy sup­
port. This review also points towards a number of research gaps that need to be ad­
dressed keeping in view the predictions of the rising frequency of extreme climate 
events in the plausible future climate ­scenarios. Some of these are indicated below:
Climate Change Impact
(i) 	
There is a need for more evidence on the impact of climate change on 
­horticultural crops, dairying and animal husbandry, and ­fisheries which 
together share about 60% of the agricultural GVA, and are ­expected to 
drive the future growth of agriculture. 
26
Pratap Singh Birthal
(ii)	
Our understanding of the impact of rainfall and temperature at v­arious 
stages of crop development is limited. This suggests a need to probe ‘how 
the variations in temperature and precipitation at ­different stages of crop 
development influence its performance’. 
(iii) 	
There is limited empirical evidence on how natural endowment ­influences 
climate change impact. For the context-specific ­climate ­adaptation 
­strategies, it is essential to know the role of natural ­endowment in shaping 
the impact of climate change. 
(iv)	
Most studies have predicted the impact of climate change on crop yields. 
There is a possibility of changes in the crops’ ­comparative ­advantage due to 
climate change. We, therefore, need to have a ­better understanding of ‘how 
climate change may influence the ­intra-regional and inter-regional shifts in 
land-use in the short and long run’. 
(v)	
Farmers often face multiple climate shocks, but there is hardly any study 
that has quantified the impact of multiple climate risks on crop yields or 
agricultural productivity. 
(vi)	
There is a very high probability that the upstream impact would ­transmit 
downstream of the chain. Research is required to understand the mecha­
nisms of risk transmission along the supply chain, and its ­impact on the 
efficiency and sustainability of different ­segments of the chain. 
Adaptation Measures
(vii) 	
Farmers use several adaptation measures to manage multiple ­climate 
risks. Studies are required on farmers’ perceptions of their potential net 
adaptation benefits or trade-off between their income and risk benefits so 
as to prioritise adaptations.
(viii) 	 The concept of ‘climate-smart agriculture’ derives its strength from 
­scientific innovations and agronomic practices, but it ignores ­several of 
the traditional risk management practices. It is, ­therefore, ­important to 
develop economically optimal crop- and location-­specific packages of 
­climate-smart practices blending both the ­scientific innovations and 
­farmers’ self-risk adjustment practices. 
27
Climate Change and Risk Management in Indian Agriculture
(ix)	
Farmers’ face several technological, informational, ­psychological, 
­sociocultural, financial and institutional barriers to the adoption of risk 
management strategies, which need to be identified and ­prioritised.
Policies and Institutions
(x)	
Analyze the strengths and weaknesses of the existing climate ­adaptation 
projects at their different levels of implementation to prove their ­efficiency, 
inclusiveness and sustainability. 
(xi)	
Study the linkages between different programmes or projects ­operated by 
different ministries and departments, and assess the potential ­social, eco­
nomic and environmental benefits of their ­convergence. 
(xii) 	
Explore the opportunities to finance climate change adaptation along the 
agricultural supply chain from genetics to end-consumption, and pros­
pects for private sector participation in climate finance. 
(xiii) 	 Assess the return on investment in research on climate-resilient ­activities 
such as crop breeding for stress tolerance and ­management of natural re­
sources, and also return on investment in agro-met ­advisory services.  
Notes
1	
RCP stands for Representative Concentration Pathway, and these make pre­
dictions of how concentrations of greenhouse gases in the ­atmosphere will 
change in the future as a result of human activities. In its Fifth Assessment 
Report, the United Nations Inter-­governmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC) used four RCPs, namely, RCP2.6, RCP4.5, RCP6.0 and RCP8.5. The 
RCPs range from very low (RCP2.6) to very high (RCP8.5) future concentra­
tions. The numerical values of the RCP indicate greenhouse gas concentra­
tion in 2100. In the long-term (2081-2100), the global mean temperature is 
expected to rise by 3.7 °C (2.6 °C to 4.8 °C) under RCP8.5; 2.2 °C (1.4 °C to 3.1 
°C ) under RCP6.0; 1.8 °C (1.1 °C to 2.6 °C) under RCP4.5; and, 1.0 °C (0.3 °C 
to 1.7 °C) under RCP2.6. In the medium-term (2046-2065) the mean global 
­temperature will be 2.0 °C (1.4 °C to 2.6 °C) higher under RCP8.5; 1.3 °C (0.8 
28
Pratap Singh Birthal
°C to 1.8 °C) under RCP6.0; 1.4 °C (0.9 °C to 2.0 °C) under RCP4.5; and 1.0 °C 
(0.4 °C to 1.6 °C) under RCP2.6. These changes are relative to the global mean 
temperature during 1986-2005.
2	
An area is supposed to have been affected by drought if the actual rainfall 
is less by 25% or more from its historical average (see ­Government of India 
2009). The drought is considered of moderate intensity if the rainfall ­deficiency 
is more than 25% but less than or equal to 50%; else the drought is severe. For 
the drought to be a universal, the rainfall ­deficiency at national level must 
exceed 10%, and at least 20% of the ­geographical area should experience a 
moderate or severe drought. 
References
Aditya, K S, M T Khan and A Kishore (2018): “Adoption of Crop Insurance and ­Impact: 
Insights from India”, Agricultural Economics Research ­Review, Vol. 31, No. 2, 
pp. 163-174.
Agrawal, A, N Perrin, A Chhatre, C S Benson and M Kononen (2012): ­“Climate 
­Policy Processes, Local Institutions, and Adaptation Actions: ­Mechanisms 
of ­Translation and Influence”, WIREs Climate Change, Vol. 3, No. 6, pp. 
­565–579.
Aggarwal, P (2008): “Global Climate Change and Indian Agriculture: Impact, Adapta­
tion and Mitigation”, Indian Journal of Agricultural Sciences, Vol. 78, No. 10, 
pp. 911-919. 
Aggarwal, P K and R K Mall (2002): “Climate Change and Rice Yields in ­Diverse Agro-
Environments of India”, Climate Change, Vol. 52, No. 3, pp. ­331-343. 
Altieri, M A and C I Nicholls (2017): “The Adaptation and Mitigation Potential of 
­Traditional Agriculture in a Changing Climate”, Climatic Change, Vol. 140, 
No. 1, pp. 33-45.
Amare, M, N D Jensen, B. Shiferaw and J D Cissé (2018): “Rainfall Shocks and Agri­
cultural Productivity: Implication for Rural Household ­Consumption”, Agri­
cultural Systems, Vol. 166, No. C, pp. 79-89.
29
Climate Change and Risk Management in Indian Agriculture
Amondo, E, F Simtowe, D B Rahut and O Erenstein (2019): “Productivity and Produc­
tion Risk Effects of Adopting Drought-Tolerant Maize Varieties in Zambia”, 
International Journal of Climate Change Strategies and Management, Vol. 
11, No. 4, pp. 570-591.
Aryal, J P, T B Sapkota, C M Stirling, M L Jat, H S Jat, M Rai, S Mittal and J M Sutaliya 
(2016): “Conservation Agriculture-based Wheat Production Better Copes with 
Extreme Climate Events than Conventional Tillage-based Systems: A Case 
of Untimely Excess Rainfall in Haryana, India”, Agriculture, Ecosystem and 
­Environment, Vol. 233, pp. 325-335.
Bahinipati, C S, V Kumar and P K Viswanathan (2020): “An Evidence-based ­Systematic 
Review on Farmers’ Adaptation Strategies in India”, Food Security,  Vol. 13, 
No. 2, pp. 399-418. 
Barham, E H B, J R C Robinson, J W Richardson and M E Rister (2011): ­“Mitigating 
Cotton Revenue Risk Through Irrigation, Insurance, and Hedging”, Journal of 
Agricultural and Applied Economics, Vol. 43, No. 4, pp. 529-540.
Bhandari, H, S Pandey, R Sharan, D Naik, I Hiwray, S K Taunk and A S R A S Sastri 
(2007): “Economic Costs of Drought and Rice Farmers’ ­Drought-Coping Mech­
anisms in Eastern India”, In S Pandey, H ­Bhandari, B Hardy (eds.), Economic 
Costs of Drought and Rice Farmers’ Coping Mechanisms: A Cross-Country 
Comparative Analysis, International Rice Research ­Institute, Manila. 
Bhattamishra, R and C B Barrett (2010): “Community-Based Risk ­Management 
­Arrangements: A Review”, World Development, Vol. 38, No. 7, pp. ­923-932.
Binswanger, H P (2012): “Is There Too Much Hype about Index-based ­Agri-cultural 
Insurance?”, Journal of Development Studies, Vol. 48, No. 2, pp. 187-200.
Birthal, P S (2019): “From Food Security to Farmers’ Prosperity: Challenges, ­Prospects 
and Way Forward”, Indian Journal of Agricultural ­Economics, Vol. 74, No. 1, 
pp. 78-95.
Birthal, P S, and J Hazrana (2019): “Crop Diversification and Resilience of ­Agriculture 
to Climatic Shocks: Evidence from India”, Agricultural ­Systems, Vol. 173, No. 
C, pp. 345-354. 
30
Pratap Singh Birthal
Birthal, P S, J Hazrana and D S Negi (2019): “A Multilevel Analysis of Drought Risk in 
Indian Agriculture: Implications for Managing Risk at Different Geographical 
Levels”, Climatic Change, Vol. 157, No. 3, pp. 499-513.
Birthal, P S, J Hazrana and D S Negi (2021a): “Impact of Climatic Hazards on 
­Agricultural Growth in India”, Climate and Development, Vol. 13, No. 10, pp. 
895-908.
Birthal, P S, J Hazrana and D S Negi (2021b): “Unleashing the Potential of Crop 
­Diversification for Improving Productivity and Reducing Risk in Indian 
­Agriculture”, Global Environmental Change (submitted). 
Birthal, P S, J Hazrana and D S Negi (2021c): “To Insure or Not to Insure? - An 
­Assessment of the Adaptation Benefits of Crop Insurance ­vis-à-vis ­Farmers’ 
Self-Adjustment Risk Management Measures”, Journal of ­Development 
­Studies (forthcoming).
Birthal, P S, J Hazrana and D S Negi (2021d): “Effectiveness of Farmers’ Risk 
­Management Strategies: Evidence from India”, Climatic Change ­(forthcoming). 
Birthal, P S., D S Negi and J Hazrana (2019a): “Trade-off between Risk and ­Returns 
in Farmers’ Choice of Crops? - Evidence from India”, ­Agricultural Economics 
Research Review, Vol. 32, No. 1, pp. 11-23.
Birthal, P S, D Roy and D S Negi (2015): “Assessing the Impact of Crop ­Diversification on 
Farm Poverty in India”, World Development, Vol. 72, No. C, 70-92.
Birthal, P S, J Hazrana, D S Negi and S C Bhan (2021a): “Climate Change and Land 
Use in Indian Agriculture”, Land Use Policy, Vol. 129, No. C.
Birthal, P S, J Hazrana, D S Negi and G Pandey (2021b): “Benefits of Irrigation against 
Heat Stress in Agriculture: Evidence from Wheat Crop in India”, Agricultural 
Water Management, Vol. 255 , No. C. 
Birthal, P S, P K Joshi, D S Negi and S Agarwal (2014): Changing Sources of Growth 
in Indian Agriculture: Implications for Regional Priorities for ­Accelerating 
Agricultural Growth, IFPRI Discussion Paper 1325, ­International Food 
Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), Washington D.C.
31
Climate Change and Risk Management in Indian Agriculture
Birthal, P S, T M Khan, D S Negi and S Agarwal (2014): “Impact of Climate Change 
on Yields of Major Food Crops in India: Implications for Food Security”, 
­Agricultural Economics Research Review, Vol. 27, No. 2, pp. 145-155.
Birthal, P S, D S Negi, M T Khan and S Agarwal (2015): “Is Indian ­Agriculture ­Becoming 
Resilient to Droughts? Evidence from Rice Production ­Systems”,  Food 
­Policy, Vol. 56, pp. 1-12.
Birthal, P S, S N Nigam, A V Narayanan and K A Kareem (2012): ­“Potential ­Economic 
Benefits from Adoption of Improved Drought-tolerant Groundnut in 
­India”, ­Agricultural Economics Research Review, Vol. 25, No. 1, pp. 1-14.
Birthal, P S, D S Negi, S Kumar, S Agarwal, A Suresh and Md T Khan (2014): “How 
Sensitive is Indian Agriculture to Climate Change?”, Indian ­Journal of 
­Agricultural Economics, Vol. 69, No. 4, pp. 1-14.
Bonfils, C and D Lobell (2007):  “Empirical Evidence for a Recent Slowdown in 
­Irrigation-Induced Cooling”, Proceedings of the National Academy of 
­Sciences, Vol. 104, No. 34, pp. 13582-13587.
Cariappa, A G A, D P Mahida, P Lal and B S Chandel (2020): “Correlates and ­Impact of 
Crop Insurance in India: Evidence from a Nationally ­Representative Survey”, 
Agriculture Finance Review, Vol. 81, No. 2, pp. 204-221. 
Chakraborty, D, V K Sehgal, R Dhakar, M Ray and D K Das (2019): ­“Spatio-temporal 
Trend in Heat Waves Over India and Its Impact ­Assessment on Wheat Crop”, 
Theoretical and Applied Climatology, Vol. 138, Nos. 3-4, pp. 1925-1937.
Choudhary, B B (2017): Climate Sensitivity of Agricultural Production ­System in Trans 
and Upper Gangatic Plains of India: Potential Economic ­Impact and Vulner­
ability, PhD Dissertation, National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal, Haryana. 
Clarke, D J (2011): Insurance Design for Developing Countries, PhD ­Dissertation, 
University of Oxford, UK.
Cole, B S, X Giné, J Tobacman, P Topalova, R Townsend and J Vickery (2013): “Barri­
ers to Household Risk Management: Evidence from India”, ­American Economic 
Journal: Applied Economics, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 104-135.
32
Pratap Singh Birthal
Dalton, T J, G A Porter and N G Winslow (2004): “Risk Management ­Strategies in 
­Humid Production Regions: A Comparison of Supplemental ­Irrigation and 
Crop Insurance”, Agricultural and Resource Economics Review, Vol. 33, No. 
2, pp. 220-232.
Dar, M H, N W Zaidi, S A Waza, S B Verulkar, T Ahmed, P K Singh, S K ­Bardhan Roy, B 
Chaudhary, R Yadav, M M Islam, K M Iftekharuddaula, J K Roy, R M ­Kathiresan, 
B N Singh, U S Singh and A M Ismail (2018): “No Yield ­Penalty under Favorable 
Conditions Paving the Way for Successful Adoption of Flood ­Tolerant Rice”, Sci­
entific Reports 8, No. 9245, https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41598-018-27648-y.
Dell, M, B F Jones and B A Olken (2012): “Temperature Shocks and Economic Growth: 
Evidence from the Last Half Century”, American Economic Journal: Macro­
economics, Vol. 4, No. 3, pp. 66-95.
Dell, M, B F Jones and B A Olken (2014): “What Do We Learn from the ­Weather? The 
New Climate–Economy Literature”, Journal of Economic ­Literature, Vol. 52, 
No. 3, pp. 740-798. 
Dercon, S (2004): “Growth and Shocks: Evidence from Rural Ethiopia”, ­Journal of 
Development Economics, Vol. 74, No. 2, pp. 309-329.
Dercon, S and L Christiaensen (2011): “Consumption Risk, Technology ­Adoption, and 
Poverty Traps: Evidence from Ethiopia”, Journal of ­Development Economics, 
Vol. 96, No. 2, pp. 159-173.
Deschênes, O and M Greenstone (2007): “The Economic Impact of Climate Change: 
Evidence from Agricultural Output and Random Fluctuations in Weather”, 
American Economic Review, Vol. 97, No. 1, pp. 354-385.
Di Falco, S, F Adinolfi, M Bozzola and F Capitanio (2014): “Crop Insurance as a 
­Strategy for Adapting to Climate Change”, Journal of Agricultural ­Economics, 
Vol. 65, No. 2, pp. 485-504.
Fischer, H W (2020): “Policy Innovations for Pro-poor Climate Support: Social 
­Protection, Small-Scale Infrastructure, and Active Citizenship under India’s 
MGNREGA”, Climate and Development, Vol. 12, No. 8, pp. 1-14. https://doi.
org/ 10.1080/ 17565529.2019.1676690.
33
Climate Change and Risk Management in Indian Agriculture
Gautam, A (2009): Impact Evaluation of Drought Tolerant Rice ­Technologies Through 
Participatory Approaches in Eastern India, Masters’ ­Dissertation, The State 
University of New Jersey, Rutgers.
Gine, X, R Townsend and J Vickery (2008): “Patterns of Rainfall Insurance ­Participation 
in Rural India”, World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 22, No. 3, pp. 539-566.
Government of India (2009): Manual for Drought Management, Department of 
­Agriculture and Cooperation, Ministry of Agriculture, New Delhi.
Government of India (2019): Water and Related Statistics, Central Water ­Commission, 
Ministry of Jal Shakti, New Delhi.
Guiteras, R (2009): The Impact of Climate Change on Indian Agriculture, Work­
ing paper, Department of Economics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA.
Gulati, A, P Terway and S Hussain (2018): Crop Insurance in India: Key Issues 
and Way Forward, Working Paper No. 352, Indian Council for Research on 
­International Economic Relations, New Delhi.
Guntukula, R and P Goyari (2020): “Climate Change Effects on the Crop Yield and Its 
Variability in Telangana, India”, Studies in Microeconomics, Vol. 8, No. 1, pp. 
119-148.
Gupta, R K, R G Singh, M L Jat, R K Jat, H S Sidhu, P S Minhas and R K ­Malik (2010): 
“Wheat Productivity in Indo-Gangetic Plains of India during 2010: Terminal 
Heat Effects and Mitigation Strategies”, PACA ­Newsletter, No. 14, pp. 1-11.
Hallegatte, S, M Bangalore, L Bonzanigo, M Fay, T Kane, U Narloch, J ­Rozenberg, 
D Treguer and Vogt-Schilb A (2016): Shock Waves: ­Managing the ­Impact of 
­Climate Change on Poverty, Climate Change and ­Development ­Series, The 
World Bank, Washington D.C. 
Hamshere, P, Y Sheng, B Moir, C Gunning-Trant, and D Mobsby (2014): What India 
Wants Analysis of India’s Food Demand to 2050, Report No. 14.16, ­Australian 
Bureau of Agricultural and Resource ­Economics and ­Sciences, Department 
of Agriculture, Australian Government, ­Canberra. 
34
Pratap Singh Birthal
Hansen, J, J Hellin, T Rosenstock, E Fisher, J Cairns, C Stirling, C Lamanna, J van 
Etten, A Rose and B Campbell (2019): “Climate Risk Management and Rural 
Poverty Reduction”, Agricultural Systems, Vol. 172, pp. ­28-46. 
Hill, R and and C Mejia-Mantilla (2015): Welfare and Shocks in Uganda, Back­
ground Paper prepared for the Uganda Poverty Assessment, The World Bank, 
­Washington D.C.
Jain, M, S Naeem, B Orlove, V Modi and R S DeFries (2015): ­“Understanding the 
Causes and Consequences of Differential Decision-making in ­Adaptation 
­Research: Adapting to a Delayed Monsoon Onset in Gujarat, India”, Global 
Environmental Change, Vol. 31, pp. 98-109. 
Jana, S K, and J Roy (2020): “Climate Change and Diseases of Plants and ­Animals: A 
Study in Home Gardens of West Bengal, India”, In A ­Karmaoui, A Ben Salem 
and A Shah (eds), Climate Change and ­Anthropogenic Impact on Health in 
Tropical and Subtropical Regions, IGI Global, Hershey, USA. 
Jaweriah, H, P S Birthal and D S Negi (2021): The Impact of Crop ­Diversification on 
Agricultural Productivity and Risk Exposure in India, Paper ­prepared for the 
Conference ‘Environmental Challenges and ­Agricultural ­Sustainability in Asia’, 
to be held on December 8-10 at Asian ­Development Bank Institute, ­Tokyo. 
Jodha, N S, N P Singh and M C S Bantilan (2012): Enhancing Farmers’ ­Adaptation 
to Climate Change in Arid and Semi-Arid Agriculture of India: Evidences 
from Indigenous Practices, Working Paper Series No. 32, International Crops 
­Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics, Andhra Pradesh. 
Joshi, P K, A Gulati, P S Birthal and L Tewari (2004): “Agriculture ­Diversification 
in South Asia: Patterns, Determinants and Policy Implications”, ­Economic & 
­Political Weekly, Vol. 39, No. 24, pp. 2457-2467.
Kala, N (2017): Learning, Adaptation, and Climate Uncertainty: Evidence from ­Indian 
Agriculture, CEEPR WP 2017-023, MIT Center for Energy and ­Environmental 
Policy Research, Massachusetts Institute of ­Technology, Cambridge, MA.
Kalra, N, D Chakraborty, P R Ramesh, M Jolly and P K Sharma (2007): ­Impact of 
Climate Change in India: Agricultural Impact, Final Report, Joint ­Indo-UK 
35
Climate Change and Risk Management in Indian Agriculture
Programme of Ministry of Environment and Forests, India, and Depart­
ment for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, United ­Kingdom, and Indian 
­Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi. 
Khatri-Chhetri, A, P Aggarwal, P Joshi and S Vyas (2017): “Farmers’ ­Prioritisation of 
Climate-Smart Agriculture (CSA) Technologies”, ­Agricultural ­Systems, Vol. 
151, pp. 184-191. 
Kumar, K S K (2011): “Climate Sensitivity of Indian Agriculture: Do Spatial Effects 
Matter?”, Cambridge Journal of Region, Economy and Society, Vol. 4, No. 2, 
pp. 221-235. 
Kumar, K S K, and J Parikh (2001): “Indian Agriculture and Climate ­Sensitivity”, 
Global Environmental Change, Vol. 11, No. 2, pp. 147-154. 
Kumar, S N (2015): “Carbon Sequestration and Beyond by Plantations: ­Exploring 
Scope for Added Income”, In S K Dhayani, R Newaj, B Alam, I Dev (eds.) 
­Agroforestry: Present Status and Way Forward, Biotech Books, New Delhi. 
Kumar, S N (2019): “Climate Change and Horticultural Crops”, In K L Chadha (eds.) 
Handbook of Horticulture, Indian Council of Agricultural ­Research, New ­Delhi. 
Kumar, S N and P K Aggarwal (2013): “Climate Change and Coconut ­Plantations in 
India: Impact and Potential Adaptation Gains”, Agricultural Systems, Vol. 117, 
pp. 45-54.
Kumar, S N, S Chander, P Sinha and R N Padaria (2020): Climate Change ­Impact, 
­Vulnerability and Adaptation-Agriculture, A Report for India’s Third ­National 
Communication to UNFCCC, United Nations ­Framework ­Convention on 
­Climate Change, Bonn. 
Kumar, S N, P K Aggarwal, R Saxena, D N Swarooparani, S Jain and N ­Chauhan 
(2013): “An Assessment of Regional Vulnerability of Rice to Climate Change in 
India”, Climatic Change, Vol. 118, Nos. 3-4, pp. 683-699. 
Kumar, S N, P K Aggarwal, D N Swarooparani, R Saxena, N Chauhan and S Jain 
(2014): “Vulnerability of Wheat Production to Climate Change in India”, 
­Climate Research, Vol. 59, No. 3, pp. 173-187. 
36
Pratap Singh Birthal
Kumar, S N, Anuja, Md Rashid, S K Bandyopadhyay, R Padaria  and M ­Khanna (2016): 
“Adaptation of Farming Community to Climatic Risk: Does ­Adaptation Cost 
for Sustaining Agricultural Profitability?”, Current ­Science, Vol. 110, No. 7, pp. 
1216-1224. 
Kumar, S N, P M Govindakrishnan, D N Swarooparani, N Chauhan, S Jain and P 
K Aggarwal (2015): “Assessment of Impact of Climate Change on ­Potato and 
­Potential Adaptation Gains in the Indo-Gangetic Plains of India”, ­International 
Journal of Plant Production, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 151-170. 
Kumar, S N, P K Aggarwal, U Kumar, S Jain, D N Swarooparani, N Chauhan and R 
Saxena (2014): “Vulnerability of Indian Mustard (Brassica ­Juncea (L.) Czernj. 
Cosson) to Climate Variability and Future Adaptation ­Strategies”, Mitigation 
and Adaptation Strategies to Global Change, Vol. 21, No. 3, pp. 403-420.
Kumar, S N, A Islam, D N Swarooparani, S Panjwani, K Sharma, N K Lodhi, S 
­Chander, P Sinha, M Khanna, D K Singh and S K Bandyopadhyay (2019): Sea­
sonal Climate Change Scenarios for India: Impact and Adaptation Strate­
gies for Wheat and Rice, ICAR - Indian Agricultural Research ­Institute, New 
Delhi. 
Kurukulasuriya, P, N Kala and R Mendelsohn (2011): “Adaptation and ­Climate 
Change Impact: A Structural Ricardian Model of Irrigation and Farm Income 
in Africa”, Climate Change Economics, Vol. 2, No. 2, pp. ­149-174. 
Kurukulasuriya, P, R Mendelsohn, R Hassan, J Benhin, T Deressa, M Diop, H M Eid, K 
Y Fosu, G Gbetibouo, S Jain, A Mahamadou, R Mano, J ­Kabubo-Mariara, S El-
Marsafawy, E Molua, S Ouda, M Ouedraogo, I Séne, D Maddison, S N Seo and A 
Dinar (2006): “Will African ­Agriculture Survive Climate Change?”, World Bank 
Economic Review, Vol. 20, No. 3, pp. 367-388.
Lal, M, K K Singh, L S Rathore, G Srinivasan and S A Saseendran (1998): ­“Vulnerability 
of Rice and Wheat Yields in North-West India to Future Changes in Climate”, 
Agriculture and Forest Meteorology, Vol. 89, No. 2, pp. 101-114. 
Lobell, D B, A Sibley and J I Ortiz-Monasterio (2012): “Extreme Heat Effects on Wheat 
Senescence in India”, Nature Climate Change, Vol. 2, No. 3, pp. 186-189.
37
Climate Change and Risk Management in Indian Agriculture
Lybbert, T J and A Bell (2010): “Why Drought Tolerance is Not the New Bt”, Nature 
Biotechnology, Vol. 28, No. 6, pp. 553-554.
Mall, R K, R Singh, A Gupta, G Srinivasan and L S Rathore (2006): “Impact of Climate 
Change on Indian Agriculture: A Review”, Climatic Change, Vol. 78, No. 2, pp. 
445-478. 
Mani, M, S Bandyopadhyay, S Chonabayashi, A Markandya and T Mosier (2018): 
South Asia’s Hotspots: The Impact of Temperature and ­Precipitation Chang­
es on Living Standards, South Asia Development Matters, The World Bank, 
Washington D.C.
Mendelsohn, R and S N Seo (2007): Changing Farm Types and Irrigation as an Ad­
aptation to Climate Change in Latin American Agriculture, World Bank Policy 
Research Working Paper 4161, The World Bank, ­Washington D.C. 
Mendelsohn, R, A Dinar and A Sanghi (2001): “The Effect of Development on the Cli­
mate Sensitivity of Agriculture”, Environment and Development Economics, 
Vol. 6, No. 01, pp. 85-101. 
Mendelsohn, R, W D Nordhaus and D Shaw (1994): “The Impact of Global Warming 
on Agriculture: A Ricardian Analysis”, American Economic Review, Vol. 84, 
No. 4 pp. 753-771.
Merga, W and D Alemayehu (2019): “Effects of Climate Change on Global Arabica 
Coffee (Coffea arabica L) Production”, Greener Journal of Plant Breeding and 
Crop Science, Vol. 7, No. 1, pp. 23-30. 
Mottaleb, K A, M R Rejesus, S Mohanty, M V R Murty, Tao Li, H G Valera and M K 
Gumma (2012): Ex Ante Impact Assessment of a Drought ­Tolerant Rice Vari­
ety in the Presence of Climate Change, Paper presented at the Agricultural and 
Applied Economics Association Annual Meeting, Washington, August 12-14.
Mukherjee, S and P Pal (2017): “Impediments to the Spread of Crop Insurance in In­
dia”, Economic & Political Weekly, Vol. 52, No. 35, pp. 16-19.
Nowogrodzki, A (2019): “How Climate Change Might Affect Tea”, Nature, Vol. 566, No. 
7742, pp. S10-S11. 
38
Pratap Singh Birthal
NPCC Report (2012): Climate Change and Indian Agriculture: Salient ­Achievements 
from ICAR Network Project, Indian Agricultural ­Research Institute, New Delhi. 
Ortiz-Bobea, A, T R Ault, C M Carrillo, R G Chambers and D B Lobell (2021): 
­“Anthropogenic Climate Change has Slowed Global Agricultural ­Productivity 
Growth”, Nature Climatic Change, Vol. 11, pp. 306-312.
Pathak, H (2019): “Agricultural Research and Development: Policy and Program 
­Priorities in India”, In R B., Bokhtiar, S M, Khetarpal, R and Thapa, Y B (eds.), 
Agricultural Policy and Program Framework: Priority Areas for Research 
and Development in South Asia, 93-115, Shrestha, SAARC Agriculture ­Center, 
Dhaka, Bangladesh and Asia-Pacific Association of Agricultural Research 
­Institutions (APAARI), Bangkok, Thailand. 
Patnaik, U, P K Das, C S Bahinipati and O Tripathy (2017): “Can Developmental Inter­
ventions Reduce Households’ Vulnerability? Empirical Evidence from Rural 
India”, Current Science, Vol. 113, No. 10, pp. 2004-2013.
Preethan, P, S Gupta and N Sharma (2020): Mainstreaming Climate ­Resilience: The 
MGNREGA Model, WRI Indi, Mumbai. Available at: https://wri-india.org/
blog/mainstreaming-climate-resilience -mgnrega-model.
Rao, K, A Whitbread and R Palanisamy (2020): India’s Agromet Advisory ­System 
(AAS) has Undergone Many Changes to be What It Is ­Today, What Should 
­Tomorrow’s Agromet Advisory System Look Like?, ­Climate Change, Agricul­
ture and Food Security, The Netherlands. ­Available at: ccafs.cgiar.org. 
Rathore, L S and N Chattopadhyay (2016): “Weather and Climate Services for 
­Farmers in India”, World Meteorological Organization Bulletin, Vol. 65, No. 
2.  A­vailable at: public.wmo.int.
Rojas-Dowing, M M, A P Nejadhashemi, T Harrigan and S A Woznicki (2017): 
­“Climate Change and Livestock: Impact, Adaptation, and Mitigation”, Climate 
Risk Management, Vol. 16, pp. 145-163.
Rosenzweig, M R and H P Binswanger (1993): “Wealth, Weather Risk and the 
­Composition and Profitability of Agricultural Investment”, Economic Journal, 
Vol. 103, No. 416, pp. 56-78. 
39
Climate Change and Risk Management in Indian Agriculture
Sanghi, A and R Mendelsohn (2008): “The Impact of Global Warming on ­Farmers in 
Brazil and India”, Global Environmental Change, Vol. 18, pp. 655-665. 
Sanghi, A, R Mendelsohn and A Dinar (1998): “The Climate Sensitivity of ­Indian Ag­
riculture”, In A Dinar,  R Mendelsohn, R Evenson, J Parokh, A Sanghi, K S K 
Kumar, J McKinsey and S Lonergan (eds.), Measuring the Impact of Climate 
Change on Indian Agriculture, World Bank Technical Paper, The World Bank, 
Washington D.C.
Sanjay, J, J V Revadekar, M V S Ramarao, H Borgaonkar, S Sengupta, D R ­Kothawale, 
J Patel, R Mahesh and S Ingle (2020): “Temperature ­Changes in India”, In 
R. Krishnan, J Sanjay, C Gnanaseelan, M ­Mujumdar, A Kulkarni and S 
Chakraborty (eds.) Assessment of Climate Change over the Indian Region, 
Springer, Singapore, pp. 21-45. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-4327-
2_2.
Sapkota, T B, M Jat, J P Aryal, R Jat and A Khatri-Chhetri (2015): ­“Climate change Adap­
tation, Greenhouse Gas Mitigation and Economic ­Profitability of ­Conservation 
Agriculture: Some Examples from Cereal Systems of ­Indo-Gangetic Plains”, 
Journal of Integrative Agriculture, Vol. 14, No. 8, pp. 1524-1533. 
Saseendran, A S, K K Singh, L S Rathore, S V Singh and S K Sinha (2000): ­“Effects 
of Climate Change on Rice Production in the Tropical ­Humid Climate of 
Kerala, India”, Climatic Change, Vol. 44, No. 4, pp. 495-514. 
Schlenker, W and M J Roberts (2009): “Nonlinear Temperature Effects ­Indicate 
­Severe Damages to U.S. Crop Yields under Climate Change”, ­Proceedings of the 
­National Academy of Sciences of the USA, Vol. 106, No. 37, pp. 15594-15598.
Singh, H, D S Negi and P S Birthal (2020): Uncertain Monsoon, Irrigation and Crop 
Yields: Implications for Pricing of Insurance Products, ­IGIDR ­Working 
­Papers  2020-018, Indira Gandhi Institute of Development ­Research, 
­Mumbai.
Singh, N P, C Bantilan and K Byjes (2014): “Vulnerability and Policy Relevance to 
Drought in the Semi-Arid Tropics of Asia – A Retrospective Analysis”, Weather 
and Climate Extremes, Vol. 3, pp. 54-61.
40
Pratap Singh Birthal
Singh, N P, B Anand, S Singh and A Khan (2019): “Mainstreaming Climate ­Adaptation 
in Indian Rural Development Agenda - A Micro-Macro ­Convergence”, Climate 
Risk Management, Vol. 24, pp. 30-41. 
Singh, P, K G Boote, D K Kadiyala and N Swamikannu (2017): “An Assessment of Yield 
Gains Under Climate Change Due to Genetic Modification of Pearl ­Millet”, 
­Science of the Total Environment, Vol. 601-602, pp. 1226-1237. 
Singh, N P, A Aarthy, S Pavithra, S J Balaji, B Anand and A Khan (2017): ­Mainstreaming 
Climate Change Adaptation into Development ­Planning, Policy Paper 32, 
ICAR-National Institute of Agricultural ­Economics and Policy Research 
(NIAP), New Delhi.
Singh, P, N Swamikannu, P M Gaur, S Komuravally, C Bantilan and K G Boote (2014): 
“Climate Change Impact and Potential Benefits of Drought and Heat Tolerance 
in Chickpea in South Asia and East Africa”, European Journal of Agronomy, 
Vol. 52, Part B, pp. 123-137.
Sinha, S K and M S Swaminathan (1991): “Deforestation, Climate Change and 
­Sustainable Nutrients Security”, Climatic Change, Vol. 16, No. 1-2, pp. 33-45. 
Srivastava, A, S Naresh Kumar and P K Aggarwal (2010): “Assessment on ­Vulnerability 
of Sorghum to Climate Change in India”, Agricultural ­Ecosystem and 
­Environment, Vol. 138, Nos. 3-4, pp. 160-169.
Tamburini, G, R Bommarco, T Wanger, C Kremen, M Heijden, M Liebman and S Hallin 
(2020): “Agricultural Diversification Promotes Multiple ­Ecosystem Services 
without Compromising Yield”, Science Advances, Vol. 6, No. 45, DOI:10.1126/
sciadv.aba1715.
Taraz, V (2018): “Can Farmers Adapt to Higher Temperatures? Evidence from India”, 
World Development, Vol. 112, pp. 205-219.
Teklewold, H, A Mekonnen, G Kohlin and S Di Falco (2017): “Does Adoption of Multi­
ple Climate Smart Practices Improve Farmers’ Climate Resilience? Empirical 
Evidence from the Nile Basin of Ethiopia”, Climate Change Economics, Vol. 8, 
No. 1, pp. 1-30.
41
Climate Change and Risk Management in Indian Agriculture
Thrupp, L A (1997): Linking Biodiversity and Agriculture: Challenges and 
­Opportunities for Sustainable Food Security, World Resources ­Institute, 
USA.
Tripathi, A K and S Sindhi (2020): “Droughts, Heatwaves and ­Agricultural ­Adaptation: 
A Historical Account for India”, Economic & Political ­Weekly, Vol. 55, Nos. 26-
27, pp. 5-12.
Upadhyay, R C, O K Hooda, A Aggarwal, S V Singh, R Chakravarty and S Sirohi 
(2013): “Indian Livestock Production has Resilience for Climate Change”, In 
S V Singh, R C Upadhyay, S Sirohi and A K Singh (eds.), Climate ­Resilient 
Livestock and Production System, National Dairy ­Research Institute, 
­Karnal.  
Vargas, R and H Angelino (2012): “A Field Experiment on the Impact of ­Weather 
Shocks and Insurance on Risky Investment”, Experimental Economics, Vol. 
1, No. 2, pp. 341-371.
Vigani, M and J Kathage (2019): “To Risk or Not to Risk? Risk Management and Farm 
Productivity”, American Journal of Agricultural Economics, Vol. 101, No. 5, 
pp. 1432-1454. 
World Bank (2013): Turn Down the Heat: Climate Extremes, Regional Impact, and 
the Case for Resilience, The World Bank, Washington D.C.
Wossen, T, T Abdoulaye, A Alene, S Feleke, A Menkir and V M Manyong (2017): 
­“Measuring the Impact of Adaptation Strategies to Drought Stress: The Case of 
Drought Tolerant Maize Varieties”, Journal of Environmental ­Management, 
Vol. 203, Part 1, pp. 106-113.
Yu, T and B A Babcock (2010): “Are U.S. Corn and Soybeans Becoming More Drought 
Tolerant?”, American Journal of Agricultural Economics, Vol. 92, No. 5, pp. 
1310-1323
Zaveri, E and D B Lobell (2019): “The Role of Irrigation in Changing Wheat Yields 
and Heat Sensitivity in India”, Nature Communications, Vol. 10, No. 1, pp. 
­4144-4150. 
About The Author 
Dr. Pratap Singh Birthal is currently ICAR ­National 
­Professor at the National Institute of Agricultural 
­Economics and Policy ­Research, New Delhi, India. ­Earlier 
he served as Principal Economist at the ­International 
Crops Research Institute for the Semi-arid Tropics, 
­Hyderabad, and Director of the Institute of ­Development 
Studies, ­Jaipur. 
Dr. Birthal is Fellow of the National Academy of ­Agricultural 
Sciences (NAAS) and ­Indian Society of Agricultural ­Economics, and ­recipient 
of the prestigious Rafi ­Ahmad Kidwai Award, Young ­Scientist Award and 
­National Fellowship from the Indian Council of Agricultural ­Research for his 
outstanding contribution to social science research.
Dr. Birthal has made ­signifcant contributions in the field of ­agricultural 
­economics and policy ­research. His ­pioneering research on ­agricultural 
­diversification and its impacts, livestock development policy, agri-food value 
chains and climate change ­impacts and ­adaptations are widely acclaimed by 
the peers and policymakers. He has published more than 150 research articles 
in high impact national and international journals. 
 
NATIONAL BANK FOR AGRICULTURE AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT
Plot No. C-24, ‘G’ Block, BKC, Bandra (E), Mumbai - 400 051
Department of Economic Analysis and Research
www.nabard.org
Taking Rural India >>Forward
/nabardonline
You Tube
